[
  {
    "Title": "पंथाभिमान और धर्माभिमान परमार्थ के मार्ग में कितने भयानक है ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MfUA3hlKtz0",
    "Transcript": "Today, it seems I have not shared a leela (divine play) like this until now. So, perhaps for the first time, this leela will unfold before many people. The topic is \"Pantabhiman\" (Sectarian Pride) and \"Dharmabhiman\" (Religious Pride), how terrifyingly obstructive they are on the path of ultimate truth an illuminating example of which comes from the 35th chapter, a leela Sectarian Pride. Meaning, when we wish to live the spiritual life, when we wish to walk the path of spirituality, then there should be no pride of religion or pride of sect. If a person possesses these two types of pride, then they cannot reach the ultimate truth. The journey to the Supreme Absolute, the Purna Parabrahma, is simply not possible for them, if they carry this sectarian pride and religious pride. So, there is a leela related to this, which Baba has presented in the 35th chapter. Today, we will try to unfold it. Before I come to the talk, there is an Ovi (verse) from this very chapter. I must take that Ovi. What Baba says, 35th chapter, Ovi number two, it is the very second Ovi. While pondering the path of truth, sectarian pride is a terrible forest. No obstacle is harder to cross than this pride The very next Ovi. Baba placed this Ovi right as the chapter begins. Karu zata paramarth vichar, just as we begin to contemplate the ultimate truth , sectarian pride (Panthabhiman) becomes a terrifying barrier. And the pride of sect, you see, that places a huge roadblock on that person's path. (No obstacle is exceedingly difficult), and there is no obstacle more difficult than this, that comes on the path of the seeker of ultimate truth there is no greater obstacle than this. Greater than sectarian pride (Panthabhiman). Ya abhimanasam duje, there is no other obstacle greater than this pride. Sectarian pride is such a massive obstacle. Now, the question is, many people will wonder, what is sectarian pride? The pride of religion is easy to understand: we are Hindu, we are Muslim, we are Christian, we are Parsi. We are Jain, we are Buddhist. Everyone has pride in their own religion. On this point, Kabir Ji offers a very profound couplet Everyone takes pride in their own sect/lineage. The truth of Hari (God) is far away; no one recognizes it. Meaning, to preserve their own sect, their own religion, their own lineage, to prove their own religion is supreme, every person struggles 24/7. Apni apni saankh ki, sab hi leeni maan (Everyone takes pride in their own sect) and everyone has pride in their own sect That my sect is the most superior. My Guru is the most superior, my religion is the most superior. All others are inferior. This is the ideology of the majority of people. So, Kabir Ji, rebuking strongly, says: Everyone takes pride in their own sect/lineage. The truth of Hari (God) is far away; no one recognizes it.) And the original Hari (God) is not attained by anyone. The realization of the original soul-substance, the Supreme Absolute, no one is able to achieve. But everyone, in their own sect... their own path, their own Guru, their own religion—towards these, everyone has arrogance, pride, haughtiness, conceit. So, this leela strikes a blow against this very attitude. Now see, even within our Hindu philosophy, some people say that Saguna Upasana (worship of God with form) is everything. And some people are so rigid that they say, we do not believe in any worship of form; for us, formless worship (Nirakar Upasana) is supreme. We do not believe in idol worship, etc. We do not believe in any person. We are directly connected with that quality-less, formless Supreme Being. . We do not need worship of form. So, even among us, some are caught up in Saguna Upasana, and others are caught up in Nirguna Upasana. Whereas, Baba clarifies in Sai Satcharitra that without passing through Saguna Upasana, you will not be able to reach Nirguna Upasana. He has clarified this in several places, and in the 11th chapter, it is made very clear But there is a person who holds this sectarian pride, who says that I do not want to bow my head before any Saguna Sakara (God with manifested form) personality. I will not give Dakshina (offering). This is the story of that person. And how Baba shatters this illusion of his, the entire leela is about that. Once, a friend of Kaka Mahajani accompanies Kaka Mahajani; this is a leela from the 35th chapter. And he always sees Kaka Mahajani going to Shirdi. For years, this has been Kaka Mahajani's routine: coming to Shirdi, spending a few days in Baba's company, Baba's presence, and then returning to his workplace in Mumbai. So, a friend of Kaka Mahajani, who is strictly a devotee of formless worship, he believes only in that, he considers formless worship supreme. And he does not want to bow his head before any Saguna Sakara (manifested form) personality. So, he tells Kaka Mahajani one thing: I will come to Shirdi. But on one condition. Your Sai Baba, I will not bow my head at his feet. And I am not going to give him any Dakshina (offering), I'm telling you beforehand. If these two conditions are acceptable, then take me to Shirdi. I will accompany you. So Kaka Mahajani says, no, you don't need to bow your head, nor do you need to give Dakshina. Please come. And so, with that condition, he arrives in Shirdi with Kaka Mahajani. Now, Baba is Baba. Baba knows that, if a person is a 10th-grade student, then only 10th-grade books look good in his hand. If a 10th-grade student walks around with an IAS book, he will become an object of ridicule. Baba knows this. That he's sagun upasana is only not completed and he is talking about nirgun upasana. Now, look at Islam. They put this point so forcefully before the entire universe, that we do not believe in Saguna Upasana (worship of form). That is why our Allah has no picture, no form. We believe only in our Allah, who is quality-less and formless. We do not believe in idol worship. So, even for them, Baba has delivered a very powerful blow in this chapter. Similarly, this person here... in a way, understand he is an Indian Muslim. I must say this now. This friend of Kaka Mahajani is a Hindustani Muslim. He is saying exactly what the Islamic faith says. p We do not believe in God with form. We only believe in the quality-less, formless God. So, on that condition, he prepares to come to Shirdi and arrives. Both go to Dwarkamai to have Baba's darshan (sight). Baba orchestrates the leela. Now imagine Baba is seated on His asana in Dwarkamai. And he is climbing the steps of Dwarkamai with Kaka Mahajani. Baba's gaze is not on Kaka Mahajani, but on his friend. And looking at the friend, He says, \"Ka Yaave Ji.\" This sounds very profound in Marathi. Meaning, as if, \"Where have you been all this time? Come brother, come, you are welcome.\" Baba says this to him. He says, \"Ka Yaave Ji.\" He says, \"Ka Yaave Ji.\" But the manner of speaking, Baba speaks in his father's voice. His father had passed away. Many years had probably passed since his death. But he has boundless love for his father. So, in the voice of his deceased father, and in his father's style, he used to greet people the same way in his life. If he welcomed someone, he would say, \"Ka Yaave Ji.\" Baba speaks those exact words from His own mouth. In welcoming that person. \"Ka Yaave Ji.\" Where have you been for so many years? You took a long time. You delayed coming here. Come, you are welcome. He says, \"Ka Yaave Ji. But the style of speaking, he says, that person who came believing \"I will not bow my head before him, I will not give Dakshina.\" Baba speaks in his father's voice, replicating the exact sound.His father is deceased, many years passed since his death. Now look, He manifested his father's form (Saguna Sakar), who was in the formless state (Nirguna Nirakar). Many years have passed since he was in the formless state. Baba manifested him with form, and tears spilled from this man's eyes. What was this? It felt exactly as if my father was speaking. The same voice, the same style, the same manner of speech. So, He brought the deceased formless one into manifest form. He is simply shaken. The illusion is shattered. Look, you talk so much about the quality-less, formless God. But what happened when I merely presented one word of your deceased father in his voice, when I presented his style to you? You became overwhelmed with emotion. Your eyes completely welled up. So, a human being cannot detach so easily from God with form. Directly talking about the formless Supreme is something we have no right to do. So then, the first condition was, \"I will not bow my head before him.\" His head bows. With that one word, that Ka Yaave Ji phrase, it completely transforms that person. The condition on the basis of which the man reached Shirdi, that arrogance breaks. And he bows at Baba's feet. Baba sees, \"Alright, I have fulfilled his first condition.\" Now the second condition. What was his second condition? \"I will not give Dakshina.\" So Kaka Mahajani says, \"Alright, don't give it.\" But at least come. I want you to have his darshan once. Now they come, and Baba starts creating the second leela. He says to Kaka Mahajani, \"Give 17 rupees. Give it.\" So He takes the 17 rupees. And then he sees and thinks, \"I am right here next to him, but He asked him for the money.\" Now, how it is... if two people go, if one is shown favor and the other is not, jealousy arises. He is asked for money, and it is now clear who Baba is. And so many people are bowing at His feet, they are washing His feet and drinking the water, showing so much respect and honor. Surely, so many people can't be foolish. And besides, the leela He showed me just now is proof. Now, somewhere, things have changed. Somewhere, a faith has awakened towards Baba. But the stubbornness remains. So Baba says, He tells Kaka Mahajani, \"You give 17 rupees.\" So Kaka Mahajani gives the 17 rupees. A small pinch of pain is felt in his heart, that Baba did not ask him. Then they leave for their lodging. They stay there for the night. The next day, they have to depart. So they go to ask for permission. Baba again says, \"Give 17 rupees.\" At that moment, he cannot control himself. Kaka Mahajani gives the 17 rupees to Baba. So, elbowing Kaka Mahajani, he says, \"He took 17 rupees from you yesterday, and from you again today. He is not asking me.\" So Baba sees, \"Oh, what is he saying?\" He asks Kaka Mahajani. He doesn't let Kaka Mahajani speak. He says, \"No, I also want to give Dakshina.\" Baba says, \"No, that feeling for Dakshina was not in your heart, that is why I did not ask you.\" \"Alright, if you also wish to give, then give.\"So he also correctly takes out 17 rupees and gives it. Now look, this 17 rupees is very important. The 17 rupees represents the five sense organs of action (Karmendriya) and the five sense organs of knowledge (Gyanendriya). First, you must surrender them to the Supreme Being. he world you are seeing and experiencing through your senses, that entire consciousness of the senses, you must withdraw it from there, , completely pull it away from everywhere these senses are running, and first lay it at the feet of the Supreme Being. That is the 10 rupees. And then the five vital airs (Pancha Prana), by whose power the senses operate, those five Pranas must also be surrendered at His feet. And after that, the mind and the intellect must also be surrendered. In this way, if you can offer these 17 elements at my feet, only then will you gain entry into the formless state. Not before that. So this is what the 17 rupees represents. Meaning, those 17 elements have not even been offered at the Guru's feet, and yet you say, \"I am a devotee of the formless, I am immersed in the worship of the formless.\" Oh, how is that possible? First, give the 17 rupees! In reality, He did not ask Kaka Mahajani for it. Baba intended to ask only him. First give the 17 rupees, brother, then you can talk about formless worship.\" Still you are completely immersed in sense memory, trapped in the thoughts of the mind, trapped in sophistry of mind You are not able to contain the five vital senses yet , So how will you enter the formless state of worship? No matter how much you say nirgun nirkara. Now this leela is for whole Islam religion also Until and unless you don't surrender these 17 tings how is that state of worship even possible? How is it possible? So Baba opened the truth. First give 17 rupees. Then talk about the truth and then say that you are a worshipper of the formless and attributless one This is like standing in front of a thorny jungle. Standing in front of a thorny forest, and saying, \"No, these are the valleys of Kashmir.\" How is that possible? You will have to travel out of that thorny forest and journey to the valleys of Kashmir. You will have to complete that pilgrimage. You will have to reach Kashmir, and then, standing in the middle of those valleys, if you say \"these are the valleys of Kashmir,\" then we will accept it. He is standing in the middle of the thorny forest and saying it is the valleys of Kashmir. Who are you trying to fool, brother? So first, create the capacity for formless worship by giving the 17 rupees, and then talk about formless worship. So Baba is saying this to Islam as well. Meaning, the eligibility is not yet proven.And yet you speak grandly. So Baba says, \"First give 17 rupees.\" Put your heartfelt faith here. Then we can talk. So, it is very easy to say all this. A person imitates others. He hears grand words. So, for the entire Islamic community, in a way, this is a brilliant leela. Those people who completely destroy the notion of God with form, who declare it wrong. What a leela! \"Ka Yaave Ji!\" What a line! A story comes to mind. Once, a similar incident occurred in the life of Swami Vivekananda. I think he was staying as a guest in a palace in Mewar. The king was surrounded by great pundits and priests, and he believed that the worship of the quality-less, formless God is the truth, it is complete. So, Vivekananda sees that this man has become so famous, he has been to America and back, so by that time he was very well-known. So he calls him, seats him, and puts him up in his palace. One day, after having a meal, he sits in front of him. And then he starts speaking grandly about the worship of the formless God in front of Swami Vivekananda. \"Swamiji, what is your opinion? I am a true seeker of formless worship.\" \"I do not believe in the worship of God with form. What do you say to this?\" Vivekananda asks, \"Really, you absolutely don't believe?\"He replies, \"No, I absolutely don't. Look, there are no pictures in my house.\" There are no idols. There is no image of God. I don't believe. So Swami Vivekananda says, \"Come here for a moment.\" He gets him up from there. The king thinks, \"It feels strange. He is getting me up from my own house. Where is he taking me?.\" \"Please come here,\" he says. So, in a large hall of the palace, there is a big portrait of his father. The man who is saying he doesn't believe in God with form. They go and stand him in front of it and say, \"Spit on him, just once.\" He is unable to spit. Vivekananda says, \"Look, speaking is one thing, living is another.\" Even those people who fully experience the quality-less, formless God, they too do not reject God with form. Because the entire world is in God with form, and they wish to take them to the formless God. Therefore, they too know its importance well. So don't assume that those who have experienced the formless God reject it. You haven't even had the experience, where do you stand? Only then does his mind settle down. So, this was one leela. And later, this leela becomes even clearer. Baba says something at that time, when both are preparing for the return journey and come to ask for Baba's permission. \"Baba, we wish to leave, if you permit.\" So Baba says one thing at that moment: Baba mag vadati tayans (Then Baba speaks to them). Jaasil re kshan ek bais (You may go, but sit for a moment). You will go, sit here for one moment. Karite zhale god upadesh, nirsavaya sabhedatmata (He gave sweet advice to remove the sense of duality) To break the duality, the non-unified soul, Baba says a very excellent sentence: The wall of separation between you and Me, tear it down completely. Then the path will be clear for us to meet each other So this God with form, this formless God, that which you are so stubbornly holding onto. Throw down this wall of oil. The pride of your own sect that you hold, that which you cling to like oil in your sectarian pride, let it fall. So that wall, throw down that wall. And after that, they ask for permission. \"Baba, we want to leave. Should we go?\" Baba says, \"Go, the path is clear.\" You will reach easily. But in reality, though Baba says the path is clear, you will reach very comfortably. But at that time, when Baba gives permission, the sky is completely overcast, there is the crashing of thunder. Heavy, torrential rain is about to fall. In such a state, Baba says, \"Go, go fearlessly.\" Meaning, you will traverse the path with great ease. Kaka Mahajani has been associated with Baba for so many years, so he has faith in Baba's word. He says, \"Baba has said we will reach safely, so we will reach home.\" There is nothing to fear. Whether a storm comes or a gale comes. We will reach. Because this is the faith of a devotee who has been connected for so many years. But the friend who came, a doubt arises in his mind, \"Why will we reach comfortably, man? What's happening outside... the thunder is roaring. Lightning is striking. There's a possibility of torrential rain, and this man says, \"Go, the journey will be completed easily.\" But Kaka Mahajani says, \"No, he said we must not stop now.\" What faith, truly! What a leela! He trusted the Word. Not nature. He trusted the Divine Man, not nature. So they accept and then they set out. Now look, the journey that is described, what is that journey? What does it say? First, they sit in a tanga (horse-drawn carriage). They go from there to Kopargaon. That means it was a journey by land. Because it must have been the rainy season, the month of June-July, when they came. So, there is a flood. They have to cross a river from Kopargaon to reach the railway station. So, they have to travel by boat there. They cross the river in a boat. So, water came. Understand this leela carefully. Water came. After that, at Kopargaon station, the train arrives, and it is said that they sit in the Agni Ratha (chariot of fire/train). So, the train came. It is called the Agni Ratha. Because it runs on the power of fire. So they sit in the Agni Ratha. In this way, they travel and reach Mumbai. So three things came here. When the tanga moved, it crossed the earth. When they sat in the boat, they crossed the water. When they sat in the Agni Ratha, they crossed the fire. Understand well. So Baba is clarifying in this leela who can reach the formless God. Alright, they crossed these three elements. And now they reach home. As soon as they open the door after reaching home, since they've been gone for two or three days. All the windows were closed when they left. They go, open the door. They open the windows. As soon as they open a window, a bird flies away with a whoosh from that window. They look and say, \"Oh my God, was this bird trapped inside the house for two or three days?\" And later, they look down, and see two dead birds. Now, the bird that flew away from the door, that is the element of air (Vayu) When we understand the knowledge of elements deeply and thoroughly. This pluralistic world, this entire expansion of the universe, as long as the element of space (Akash Tattva) and the element of air (Vayu Tattva) exist among the five great elements, up to that point, He is the quality-less, formless God. But as soon as descent begins from there, the creation of God with form begins from there. That is, from the element of fire. After that, upon reaching water, it becomes more solid, and upon reaching earth, then the entire universe... its expansion has no limits But, you see, crossing these three gross elements... look, the grossest is the earth element. More subtle than that is the water element. And the more subtle something is, the more pervasive it is. We must first accept this fact. It must be accepted. Water is more subtle than the earth element, so its pervasiveness is greater than the earth. More subtle than water is the fire element, and it is more pervasive than water. And more subtle than fire is the air element, and it is even more pervasive than fire. And that which penetrates the sky (space), then imagine what the pervasiveness of the Soul must be. And how subtle it must be. We can just imagine. So here, the person who crossed the earth, on the path of elemental knowledge, who overcame the earth element, reaches water. After reaching water, the earth cannot harm him. Because water is a higher element than earth. And after rising above water, into fire. That is why it is clearly written here that the train journey, as soon as they sat in the Agni Ratha... The rain continued, water poured down torrentially, but despite that, because they were safely seated in the Agni Ratha, they did not have to suffer any consequence. Meaning, it had no effect on them. So, the leela is trying to convey that when you enter a higher element, the lower elements cannot harm you. That is why Baba has shown so many leelas in Sai Satcharitra. Like, cooking meat in one place and feeding people. But stirring that meat with His hand, yet the fire does not burn His hand. The Khanda Yoga (Yoga of Fragmentation) where He fragments His body and scatters it.But then returns to His original, whole form. There are many such leelas. Like water cannot soak Him. The leela of Megha in the 28th chapter. So, Baba has repeatedly tried to convey that this is the elemental knowledge, and O man, every person must reach that elemental knowledge. So, in this leela too, He has shown that among the five great elements, the journey starts from earth and reaches the sky (space). And after that, one attains the element of ultimate truth. So, this leela has been brought out in a very excellent way. And moving forward It is very easy to speak of the formless God. But before that, you have to give the 17 rupees. If you give the 17 rupees, then you gain entry into the formless God. There are many such things, whose secrets are revealed by this leela. Now look, He says, those two birds... because I had closed the doors and windows, those three birds were inside. I had not seen them, but because they did not get food and water for two days, two birds died. And one, perhaps it was destined to live, death was not written in its fate, so it flew away. But those two were destined to die, so they died, as is said. Now, this leela also applies to those who speak of formless worship. That the day the connection to food and water is completely severed from your life, that day you may speak of the formless God. Not before that. He is saying this. This is also a very big aspect of this leela. That is why Baba takes the three-day samadhi (meditative absorption), where he takes no food, water, or air. But still, He rises after three days. So, only a person of that level is fit to speak of the formless God. Not people like us. He is stating this as well. So, meaning, those people who are caught up in food and water, those people for whom survival is impossible without consuming food and water to maintain their existence. Those people, they should not speak of this formless God. This is another aspect. The day your connection with food and water is permanently severed, after that you can speak of the true formless God. Not before that. So every person who is consuming food and water, and exists in the manifest form for that person, speaking of the formless God is not appropriate.",
    "Description": "…",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "1,612 views",
    "Likes": "134"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Why is Goddess Lakshmi Saraswati given only one day but Goddess Durga gets nine days? | By Krishnaji",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P8h4XHBBoE4",
    "Transcript": "This is no ordinary book; it is a radiant counsel, His own autobiography in His own words. Om Sai Ram Today, we are in the city of Maa Shakti, nestled in the lap of Maa Kali. First of all, millions of salutations at her sacred feet. We pray that with her benevolent hand upon our heads, she may grace these three days of satsang, allowing her divine words to flow from our lips into our hearts, and immerse us all in the ocean of her wisdom. See, now that we have arrived in the abode of Maa Shakti, I wish to share a few words about her alone. Arun ji took us to Kali Ghat for darshan, and we had her darshan early this morning. Our scriptures declare, a profound description of the Tridevi, the three divine powers. The first is Mahakali, then Mahalakshmi, and finally Mahasaraswati. We all know this well. But have you ever pondered, why Maa Kali, Maa Shakti, or Maa Durga are worshiped for nine full days? In Navratri, nine days are dedicated to them, while Maa Lakshmi receives but one day, Laxmi Pujan and Maa Saraswati is honored on the day of Dussehra. Yet to Mahashakti, Maa Kali, nine days are offered. Have you ever wondered why? Why such immense importance to Maa Shakti? Nine days and nights of her upasana. And now, seated in her sacred city, I felt to offer these words at her lotus feet. Why nine days for her, while Maa Lakshmi and Maa Saraswati receive only one each? There is a profound secret here, a deep mystery - not without reason. Consider: If Maa Shakti were absent from our lives, for we address her with love as, \"Ya Devi sarvabhuteshu shakti rupena samsthita, namastasyai, namastasyai, namastasyai namo namah.\" O Mother, O Durga, you who abide in all beings as the form of Shakti, O Devi, present in every creature as the essence of power, \"Ya Devi sarvabhuteshu shakti rupena samsthita,\" I prostrate at your feet repeatedly. Have you ever imagined , what would happen if Maa Shakti withdrew her power from within us, stripping away our kriyashakti, our capacity to act? What could Maa Lakshmi or Maa Saraswati accomplish then? What could they do? There is an incident, the elder ones will grasp deeply: In Bombay, those great industrialists of an era - today their heirs are considered highly successful. I speak of Dhirubhai Ambani ji. He was paralyzed, and vast fortunes were spent on treatments across countries, but he could not recover from that stroke. Ultimately, he attained death. It is said that his wealth ranks among the top ten or twelve in the world such a titan of fortune. Yet, despite all that riches, he could not overcome illness, because Maa Shakti had withdrawn her hand. No matter how much Lakshmi or Saraswati one may have, no matter the knowledge, if Maa casts a grave affliction, squeezing out all vitality from within, then neither Saraswati nor Lakshmi can function. They thrive only when Maa Kali lays the foundation, bestowing full health and vigor. When health is robust, the mind blooms in joy. Only with true well-being can you savor the wealth you've earned. Only in vitality can you experience the knowledge you've gained, share it with others. But without that health, without that Shakti, if Maa, for some reason, deprives us through severe illness, then neither Lakshmi nor Saraswati avails. Thus, Maa Durga holds such paramount place, she is the very source of our energy, the bedrock of our existence. Upon her, the edifice of Maa Lakshmi or Maa Saraswati is raised. Yet, any grand palace endures only if the foundation is unshakeable. So too is Maa Kali our bedrock. If her compassion rests upon us, only then do Maa Lakshmi and Maa Saraswati hold true value in our lives. If Maa Shakti departs for any cause, all is void - everything attained becomes naught. Hence, such reverence for Maa Shakti. She is hailed as kriyashakti, the power of action. Even scriptures affirm: For the creation of progeny, her might is invoked only then does a child come into being. So profound is her creative force. If that Shakti vanishes from our lives, nothing remains. Thus, we ever pray at her feet: O Mother, first make me wholly empowered by your Shakti, render me potent. But even before that, purify my mind, for without purity, I would squander your bestowed power amiss. O Mother, bring sanctity foremost into my life. And if impurity lingers, if purity eludes, then at the hour of need, withdraw your Shakti, leave me powerless. But O Mother, I yearn first for purity in my being. Once that dawns, grant me your boundless strength, and I shall wield it solely for the good, never for harm. Thus, we all beseech Maa Shakti. In the same vein, if Maa Lakshmi graces our lives, let her come only after our minds are purified. If we dwell in impurity and she bestows compassion, piling riches upon us, we would misuse that wealth, squander it wrongly. Likewise with Maa Saraswati: If I amass knowledge from countless books, yet my heart remains unpurified, I would pervert even that wisdom. So, these three powers are truly interdependent, complementary - one sustains the other. May, all these three divine forces, enter our lives only when the mind is sanctified, the heart made pure. Upon attaining that chitta shuddhi, when these three Shaktis arrive, you shall uplift the world - misuse becomes inconceivable, even in dreams. These are kriyashakti, ichchashakti, and gyanashakti - the triad of Mahakali, Mahalakshmi, and Mahasaraswati. They must certainly manifest in our lives, in varying measures. Observe: In some, health abounds, yet they are paupers in wealth and wisdom. In others, riches overflow, but health and knowledge are barren. In yet others, knowledge flourishes, with moderate health and wealth. Remember, this creation is such: All three rarely converge in one soul, a bitter truth. Those in whom they do, we call stars their lives shine like stars. Witnessing such souls, we are profoundly inspired, though they are exceedingly rare. Yet these are the stars that pulse vibrantly among us those blessed with kriyashakti as the vital source, Maa Lakshmi's grace, and Maa Saraswati's favor. And often in this world, when I speak of Maa Saraswati, I mean spiritual wisdom, not worldly learning. The latter abounds everywhere; I speak not of it. But one with complete spiritual gnosis, fully graced by Maa Lakshmi, and empowered wholly in health by Maa Durga, Maa Kali - such a being is a rarity in this realm. Yet if we grasp their essence, their sanctity, and first seek chitta shuddhi from them, then beseech their boons, we tread the true path. But if these gifts flood our lives before purity, the peril of straying heightens. Whenever you bow before them, ever recall my words truly, when such a prayer rises, the three Devis dance in ecstasy, tears of bliss flowing. In this vast creation, at least one soul comprehends this depth, seeking purity before my grace. They'll rejoice. Whenever you stand before the Mother(Devi), let these words echo let this prayer spring from the heart: \"If you shower your graces upon me before chitta shuddhi, I shall surely falter, misuse your power.\" \"O Mother, if you truly wish to bless me, first sanctify my mind, purify my being, and then pour forth your boundless blessings.\" This was the glory of Trishakti. O Mind-Enchanting One, Remover of Curses and Suffering, Destroyer of Ignorance, Bestower of Liberation, The Supreme Giver of Auspiciousness, Embodiment of Truth, Consciousness, and Bliss, the Sacred Mother of countless embodiments of Sai. the True Form of Sai Himself Victory to the Divine Scripture: Shri Sai Satcharita.",
    "Description": "In this video, Krishnaji reveals the spiritual significance of the three goddesses—Maa Lakshmi, Maa Saraswati, and Maa Kali. The Tridevis are not merely idols for worship, but rather the fundamental forces of our lives—the power of knowledge, the power of will, and the power of action. Maa Lakshmi bestows the boon of prosperity and contentment, Maa Saraswati spreads the light of spiritual knowledge and wisdom, and Maa Kali liberates us from inner ignorance and negativity, providing self-confidence. Therefore, while Maa Lakshmi and Maa Saraswati are worshipped on one day, Maa Kali's sadhana is performed for nine days, as her form awakens dormant powers within the seeker.\n\nSacred hymns like \"Ya Devi Sarvabhuteshu...\" remind us that the goddesses exist within every living being. When a seeker prays to the Tridevis from the heart, their life is illuminated not only physically but also spiritually. Their grace brings balance, peace, and divinity to life.\n\nThis divine explanation and the importance of the Trinity in human life has been presented by Krishnaji. \n\n \n1:25 – Which three powers?\n2:33 – Why only one day to worship Maa Lakshmi and Maa Saraswati, 9 days for Maa Kali?\n3:04 – Ya Devi Sarvabhuteshu…\n9:09 – How do the three powers complement each other?\n9:41 – Action power, will power, knowledge power\n12:52 – Prayer to the Trinity from the heart \n \n\nIn this video Krishnaji reveals the spiritual essence of the three divine goddesses—Maa Lakshmi, Maa Saraswati, and Maa Kali. The Tridevis are not just deities of worship, but the eternal embodiments of three cosmic powers: Jnana Shakti (power of spiritual knowledge), Iccha Shakti (power of will), and Kriya Shakti (power of action). Maa Lakshmi blesses us with prosperity and contentment, Maa Saraswati enlightens us with wisdom and intellect, and Maa Kali destroys ignorance and negativity, granting inner strength. This is why Maa Lakshmi and Maa Saraswati are worshiped for a single day, whereas Maa Kali is worshiped for nine days, as her energy awakens hidden spiritual forces within a seeker. \n\nThe sacred hymn “Ya Devi Sarva Bhuteshu…” reminds us that these divine powers reside within every living being. When one prays sincerely to the Tridevīs, life becomes enriched both materially and spiritually. Their blessings bring balance, harmony, and divine illumination in every aspect of life. \n\nThis profound narration is presented by Krishnaji on the importance of Tridevīs in human life. \n\n#tridevi #maalakshmi #maasaraswati #maakali #jnanashakti #icchashakti #kriyashakti #saileerahasya #spirituality #devotion …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "Saileela Rahasya, Navratri, Dasra, Lakshmi Pujan, gen z, Ma Kaali, Ma Durga, Ma Sarswati, Saibaba, Shirdi, Krishnaji, Krishnaji Mumbai wale, Tridevi Mahima, Maa Lakshmi, Maa Saraswati, Maa Kali, Tridevi Secrets, Tridevi Puja, Tridevi Meaning, Lakshmi Puja, Saraswati Puja, Kali Maa Sadhana, या देवी सर्वभूतेषु, देवी महिमा, शक्ति साधना, Tridevi Spiritual Secrets, Krishna ji Satsang, देवी का रहस्य, त्रिदेवियों की शक्ति",
    "Views": "1,087 views",
    "Likes": "129"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई ही तो है जिसने \"गुरु\" शब्द को अर्थ दिया ! - By Krishnaji",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sT28X9mJFj8",
    "Transcript": "This is no ordinary book; it is a radiant counsel, His own autobiography in His own words. Om Sai Ram The topic is: \"My Baba, my Sai, has given meaning to the word 'Guru'.\" The word \"Guru\" has been endowed with true significance by my Sai. Because when we say guru, saint, mahant, or an avatar, The true saints, gurus, sadgurus, They do not belong to any one individual, any one sect, or any one religion. Just as the sky belongs to all, the sun to all, Water is for everyone, air is for everyone. No one can claim exclusive rights over them. Similarly, if someone is a true saint, a true guru, a true prophet they cannot be confined to one caste, community, or religion. And if such divisions still exist within them, then they are neither a saint, nor a prophet. One whose base instincts have not yet fallen away, Whose sense of duality has not dissolved, cannot be a saint, prophet, abbot, or an incarnation of the Lord. Thus, Baba has given true meaning to the word \"Guru,\". Baba, throughout his entire life, Never aligned himself with any one sect. Never confined himself to any one religion. And only one who has attained the ultimate essence, the supreme reality, can live such a life. One who has realized the fundamental Parabrahma form, Once that is attained, nothing else remains to be divided or shared. Wherever he looks, he sees only his own Guru. As far as the eye can see, it is \"I am all, I alone exist.\" This is the experience of the supreme essence. After attaining that supreme reality, no other person or object remains to be apportioned. Thus, only one who has realized that ultimate truth, can live a life of tolerance toward all religions and sects, with equal love for all. Whenever a devotee from another sect approached Baba, he never claimed them for his own fold. First, He refined their flaws. He strengthened their faith. He removed whatever defects were within them, and then, multiplying their devotion infinitely, He reestablished them in their own guru's path, reconnecting them firmly, regardless of the sect they came from. This teaching- I do not believe that in the entire cosmos, anyone has embodied the guru essence with such a vast heart as my Sai has given it true meaning. Today, I take up a very important leela: Chapter 12, the story of Muley Shastri. Muley Shastri was from Nasik, a dedicated Brahmin, deeply inclined toward rituals and Agnihotra (Fire-offering). He always performed worship in pure, washed attire, studying the Vedas and scriptures diligently. But he was rigid in nature, believing rituals must be performed exactly so. This is necessary in the beginning. But as depth increases, such rigidity should fade. In the early stages, it's good. So, this is the story of that rigid Brahmin. Chapter 12: Muley Shastri. By the grace of karma and dharma, he somehow arrives in Shirdi. Upon reaching Shirdi, he enters Baba's court and sees people devotedly worshiping Baba. He is deeply impressed. Besides Vedic studies, he was proficient in astrology, Palmistry, physiognomy, and almanacs - he was an expert in all. By seeing Baba revered by so many, he thinks: If I could once hold his hand, I could read his palm lines and understand which lines have made him so adored today, as per samudrika shastra, the science of palmistry. If Baba's hand comes into mine, I'll examine his lines and gain insight - this line is why he is worshiped as divine. His thought is: I normally read the palms of worldly people. If Baba's hand comes to me, I'll study his lines as study material. And that too, of an avatar. If an avatar's hand comes to me, it would be invaluable study material. So, with this intention, he extends his hand toward Baba, but Baba doesn't give his hand. Instead, four bananas lying nearby are picked up and placed in his hand. Baba indirectly says: Foolish one, what will you read in the hand of one who holds the power to grant dharma, artha, kama, moksha? Take these four bananas, eat them, and sit peacefully. He gives him the four bananas, and after sitting there a while, he leaves and goes to Sathe Wada or Dixit Wada, as those were the places then. He goes to Sathe Wada, takes a bath, performs his evening prayers, thinking he'll decide later whether to return or not. He heads to Sathe Wada, and Baba rises for his morning ritual, which was to go to Lendi Bagh. As he leaves, he tells all the devotees: 'Bring saffron, we have to wear ochre robes today.' People are puzzled: Why is Baba suddenly asking for saffron today? And why will Baba wear ochre robes? But they think: Whatever comes from his mouth cannot be meaningless. There must be a reason. Baba goes, spends about an hour in Lendi Bagh performing his ritual, and returns to Dwarkamai before the midday aarti. The aarti is about to begin. People stand immersed in devotion, ready for the midday aarti. At that moment, Baba says: Someone go and tell that rigid Brahmin - Muley Shastri that I have asked for dakshina, and bring some dakshina. See, Baba says this. Bapusaheb Booty is also sitting there. So, he rises. The guru has commanded. Let's go to Muley Shastri and say \"Baba has asked for dakshina from you.\" Though, Bapusaheb Jog was also there in the Sathe Wada, along with Muley Shastri. He tells Muley Shastri: \"You too come for the midday aarti.\" At that time, Muley Shastri, after bathing, is preparing for his worship in specific attire - called \"sovala\" in Marathi, meaning pure, washed cloth. As an Agnihotri Brahmin, he is readying for his upasana. He says to Jog: \"No, no, you go for aarti. I'll complete my daily ritual and see later; I'll take darshan of your guru in the afternoon.\" He brushes it off, and here Baba insists: Go and bring dakshina from that rigid Brahmin. He didn't listen to Jog, so Jog returns to Dwarkamai with the aarti plate. but Baba plays his game: Go and bring dakshina from that rigid Brahmin. Who rises? Booty rises. Booty goes to the wada and says: Baba has asked for dakshina from you. As soon as he hears Baba has asked for dakshina from him, he thinks: By what right does your guru ask dakshina from me? He may be your guru, not mine. By what authority does he demand dakshina? I don't consider him my guru. I am a pure Brahmin, and he is an impure Yavana dwelling in a mosque. Am I surrendered at his feet? What right does he have to ask me for dakshina? He thinks this inwardly, not saying it to Booty. But then he thinks: Booty, a millionaire, has been sent. How can I refuse him? Baba plants the resolve in Booty's mind that he will go for dakshina. He can't say no to Booty now - a millionaire, after all. After all, wealth has its place. Baba is the master player. Baba knows whom to send so that he will quietly rise and come, leaving his work incomplete. Indeed, it happens so. He can't refuse Booty, the millionaire. He leaves his ongoing rituals midway, and comes along with Booty. And, dressed in his pure ritual attire - the specific clothes for worship he goes to Dwarkamai with Booty in those very clothes. Upon arriving, he doesn't climb up the steps of Dwarkamai, He stands in the sabha mandap below, thinking: Dressed in such pure attire, after such a sacred bath, as an Agnihotri Brahmin, if I enter the mosque, I'll become impure again. He saves himself: I won't go up in these clothes. In the morning, when I took darshan, I wasn't in pure attire - that was different. But now, as a rigid Brahmin, I've donned such sacred clothes. So, in these clothes, I won't climb the steps of Dwarkamai and enter. Baba perceives this. Fine? Stay in the sabha mandap. He stands there. After the aarti, Mantra pushpanjali is sung. Then flowers are showered. He too has flowers in hand and throws them. Since there's no devotion, I'll say \"throw,\" not \"offer.\" How can he say \"offer\", he throws the flowers. But as he throws the flowers toward Baba, Baba reveals his play. His departed guru, who had attained heaven a few years ago, Who had left the body only a few years prior - Guru Gholap Swami Appears in Baba's place. He is astonished. First, am I not asleep? Not dreaming? He pinches himself. He pinches and hurts himself. No, I'm awake. If awake, then how is Guru Gholap Swami here in Sai Baba's place? And that too, clad in full bhagwa attire, as his guru always was a saffron-robed sannyasi, Gholap Swami. Dressed exactly so, staff in hand, seated there. He becomes utterly overwhelmed with emotion. But while throwing flowers, he gets overwhelmed and can't stay in the sabha mandap anymore so he climbs the steps. In Sai Satcharita, there's a verse: Baba says, all who come to me, no matter their base tendencies, however lowly, They are like inert iron, and I am like a magnet, drawing them in. That inert iron - I am the lodestone. I have that magnetic power; no matter how inert the iron, Once it comes into my gaze, it is drawn. Attracted toward me. In the same way, while showering flowers, he beholds his guru and can't remain in the sabha mandap for even a moment. He quickly climbs the steps and prostrates directly at Baba's feet, at that moment, it's not Baba, but Guru Gholap Swami, he falls at His feet. Tears stream down profusely. The eight sattvic emotions surge within. His entire being is transformed. Just moments ago, minutes before, his mental state was entirely different- now completely changed. Immersed in the eight sattvic bhavas, he rolls at the feet, and when he opens his eyes, he sees Sai Baba. Sometimes Guru Gholap Swami appears, sometimes Sai Baba. But he realizes: My thinking was wrong. My ideology was flawed. This is no ordinary person. This is the incarnation of Parabrahma itself. Wherever your or my thoughts reach, Baba resides in that very form. Because he is seated at the pinnacle of perfection. Have you ever felt this?- When we live in our homes in the city, Suppose we step out - how far can our vision go? To the house in front. You can't tell what's beyond that house. That's our limitation, isn't it? But suppose there's a huge mountain nearby in your city, and you climb it. You reach the summit. From the summit, the entire city is visible. Visible, right? Similarly, one whose spiritual journey has reached the sahasrara sees the entire universe within himself, as his own form. For him, 'this guru is separate, that one is different; this religion is separate, that sect is different' - no. He has risen far above. These are our entanglements, our illusory antics. This \"mine-yours\" feeling, this duality, This my sect, my religion, my guru, your guru - all these ailments are below. But one who has reached the spiritual summit, such height, has no place in life for such rubbish. Their heart is so vast; the sadguru knows that where this poor soul stands, these ailments are inevitable. They will be there. But I am the sadguru. How can I coexist with that ailment? So, being at such height, Baba awakened everyone in his court. He drew Muley Shastri toward himself and reestablished him in his place bringing his departed guru, who had left the body years ago, back to life, And elevating his devotion to the ultimate abode. Baba deepened his guru bhakti in his own guru. This quality of Sai Baba - I don't think I've ever heard it anywhere. In all the scriptures I've read, all the people I've listened to, this quality is unheard of. Such vastness. Hence, the topic: \"My Sai has given meaning to the word 'Guru'.\" Original gurus are like this: If a disciple of another guru comes by, they don't think, \"Let me add him to my fold\". Baba never had such base feelings, and couldn't, because he had reached the ultimate state, seated at the pinnacle of knowledge. Such ill will cannot arise in that person's mind. Impossible And at the end of this leela, there are two verses: Baba says, what will you learn, from this leela of Muley Shastri? There are two verses- I'll take them. Verse number 176, Chapter 12. \"Jo jo jayacha guru asava, Tyachechi thayi drudh vishvas basava, Anyatra kothehi to nasava, mani thasava guhyarth ha\" What a verse! He says: \"Jo jo jayacha guru asava\" Whosoever has a guru, Definitely, in this world, people may have different gurus. Whosoever may be your Guru, Firm faith must reside in their feet alone. And such firm faith should not exist elsewhere for any other. \"Mani thasava guhyarth ha\" And this deep secret behind the leela, treasure it in your heart. Respect for all must be there. Faith only in one's own guru; respect for all, lest contempt arise in the mind for anyone. Respect is one thing; faith is another. But the problem is: To elevate our guru, we demean others. That is wrong. Respect all, but take pride in your own guru. Yet, do not view another guru or disciple with contempt. This is the intent. But firm faith in one's own guru. Hence, Baba says: \"Jagat sant amap apula bap to apula bap\" Chapter 45, Verse 119. \"Sant srushti maji umap, Apula baap to apula baap, sai mukhinche he karuna laap, kora swarhridaypatavari\" First, let me explain why this verse comes. Because we think we first visited Baba some years ago. That's our perception. But before we reach there, his work on us has already begun. He has already set us on the track. And guides us on that path. Hence, if you go elsewhere, the chance of wandering increases. It takes more time. We suffer, and so does he in cleansing us. That's why: Stay where you are. Because work on you has already started there. You think it's your first time going to their darshan - no, His gaze fell on you before that. Like tobacco for the chillum - it's processed beforehand. Then, by fortune, it reaches his hand. Later, he lightens it separately. But his eye was on you from before. He has already taken you in process. So, if you wander elsewhere, it takes Baba longer to cleanse you, and you longer to reach the destination. Hence, faith must be in one place. Your guru is yours. And further, verse 178 \"Konachi kirti kitihi aso, Apule guruchi mulihi naso, Pari swaguruthaich vishwas baso, hachi updesho yethila\" He clarifies outright: Let some other guru's glory be whatever, \"Konachi kirti kitihi aso,\" Our guru's may be less. Not so many followers, Not such glorification But let faith always remain in our guru's feet. This is the teaching of this leela, says Baba. So, Baba has truly given meaning to the word \"Guru.\" Original gurus are like this; true gurus are like this. He has given meaning to the word \"Guru.\" And presented it to the whole world. Otherwise, If a person is slipping from my hand, people go to extremes. So, when will this feeling come? When will such vastness arise in us? If a disciple of another guru comes to you, If you can, multiply his faith in his own guru infinitely. And if you lack that ability, then stay silent. But never extol your guru's glory before that disciple of another guru. This is Baba's message. A unique message. No guru in the world has given such a message to anyone. And he could give it because he is complete. Wherever He looks, He sees Himself. Nothing is separate from him - not Muley Shastri, not his guru Gholap Swami Baba says: In every form, I alone pulsate. One who has such realization, How can he descend to lower levels and act? Thus, \"My Sai has given meaning to the word 'Guru'\"- truly. He has placed the meaning of \"Guru\" before the whole world. Now, another story: Chapter 26, Bhakta Pant. Actually, he isn't Baba's devotee: he is a disciple of another guru. One day, traveling from Virar - near Mumbai he meets some people on the train. They say: \"We're going to Shirdi. Come with us.\" He has no interest. Where is Shirdi? Who lives there? He knows nothing. But he is fully surrendered at another guru's feet. So, he says: \"No, I have already have one guru. I'm completely satisfied.\" \"No need to wander here and there.\" But those people, out of love: \"Just join us, it'll be nice. Come, what difference does it make? All gurus are one.\" Perhaps they said such things. But his mind wavers a bit: \"They're inviting with such love. If I refuse, it hurts.\" But finally, he says: \"No, you go. I'll ask my guru for permission. If he allows, I'll catch the next train to Shirdi. You proceed.\" He goes to his guru and says: \"On the train, some of my relatives, met me. They were going to Shirdi and insisted, but I didn't go. But I'll go only after your permission.\" The guru says: \"Why need permission? Go, visit and return\" With a big heart. So, next day morning, he arrives, meets those people He reaches Dwarkamai, and sees the crowd around Baba, people applying perfumes, washing feet, applying sandalwood, the whole worship and outpouring of emotions. He, Bhakta Pant, is utterly delighted, climbs Dwarkamai's steps, takes Baba's darshan, and at that instant, faints, losing consciousness for a few moments. Baba says: \"No need to worry, sprinkle some water, he'll revive.\" Baba is the one who made him unconscious. They sprinkle water, and he opens his eyes and sits up. As he opens his eyes, Baba utters a statement. He says: \"Go wherever you must, But hold fast to your own guru. Even if you have to go anywhere in the world, go, But let your faith in your guru never waver.\" These words come after he rises. In that brief unconsciousness - what happens? Tell me, what happens in deep sleep? One thing: Our ego becomes zero. There, our sense of \"I\" vanishes completely. Taking support of that, Baba plants the seed he needed: \"I salute your faith in your guru\" - multiplying it infinitely toward his guru. That gap where ego was zero for moments- using that, he deepened his guru devotion infinitely. Such leelas are not heard elsewhere. Truly, how safe is this court. Whoever comes, of any religion, any sect, And even if their guru is a bit weak, Baba does what the guru should do, and sends them back to their guru's feet. What a unique way! Can you imagine? It may happen that the person's guru is weak, lacking capacity. Fine, no issue. Baba does the work himself, pours his full power into the devotee. But his guru devotion - making it profound, returns him to his guru's feet. Such uniqueness. How vast is His heart! Truely, I've heard nothing like this anywhere. If it happens anywhere, it's only in Sai's court. Hence, the topic: \"My Sai has given meaning to the word 'Guru'.\" Truly, if anyone has given true meaning to \"Guru,\" it's Baba. And if someone calls themselves a guru, only if they have these qualities are they true; otherwise, grabbing a stray person and adding to their fold. That means he is incomplete. Perfection hasn't been attained. Hence such actions. One who pervades every particle, Who has become the lord of the universe, alone can hold such heart's vastness. Because it makes no difference to him: \"This poor soul's weakness is seeing me and his guru separate, because he is yet far from the experience of 'I alone am.'.\" But the day he realizes, all these ailments will vanish on their own. So, for now, establish him in his guru and uplift him gradually. This compassion toward a stranger, a disciple of another guru- Original sadgurus are like this. Hence, Baba has given meaning to the word \"Guru.\" Now, one more leela: Chapter 38. Nana Saheb Chandorkar had been connected to Baba for years. Once, his wife's sister's husband, Biniwale, Says: Take me for darshan of your Baba. He takes him to Kopargaon. They bathe in the Godavari river nearby, and since he deeply reveres Datta, Biniwale, Nana Saheb Chandorkar's brother-in-law. He says: \"There's a Datta temple a short distance away. I always take his darshan. Come, let's first take his darshan, then go to Shirdi.\" But Nana Saheb Chandorkar says: \"You do it always. Come, first take darshan of my guru, let's go to Shirdi first.\" He doesn't allow him to take darshan of his adored deity Datta, and directly grabs his hand, bringing him to Shirdi. They reach Baba's court. As soon as they arrive, Baba asks Nana Saheb Chandorkar: How was the journey? He says: \"Yes, fine, Baba. But what happened - a big thorn pricked in Kopargaon.\" Baba says: \"Do you know why the thorn pricked?\" \"No, Baba.\" \"You didn't let Biniwale take darshan of his adored one - Datta, in whom he has profound love. He kept telling you: Let me take his darshan first, then we'll go to Shirdi. But you didn't allow him that, and forcibly dragged him here: Come to my guru first. That's why this time only a thorn pricked. Next time if you do such a thing, I'll hurl a trident.\" This is what He is saying? What teachings ! If one lacks such vastness of heart, he cannot be a guru. This is Sai Baba. Otherwise, people unnecessarily look at caste, sect, religion. But that essence is the supreme reality. If you truly understand that essence, it transcends all - having swallowed them to reach there. Yet if they still talk of this religion, that sect, then they are not original gurus, not original saints. Whoever speaks such things, know for sure the original essence hasn't touched them. Confirmed. He is neither original guru, nor original saint, Nor original prophet. And if the divine essence has been attained, he experiences: I alone reside in this entire universe. Nothing besides me. So why would such a person harbor ill-feelings toward anyone? Impossible This vastness can only be given by him. Those who haven't attained such supreme experience, remain entangled in these, yet call themselves gurus, saints, preachers. But the original hasn't been grasped. If the original is grasped, they too would fill with Baba's vastness. This was \"My Sai has given meaning to the word 'Guru'.\" If anyone has explained the essence of guru to the world, it's Baba. Today is Guru Purnima, and I believe this was a very important topic. What is the essence of guru (Guru-tatva) Like the sky is for all, the sun for all, the air for all. Similarly, if someone calls themselves guru, they belong to all religions, all sects, all paths- if He is an original guru. If not original, they'll spout nonsense and pass their life. So, this was \"My Sai has given meaning to the word 'Guru'.\" O Mind-Enchanting One, Remover of Curses and Suffering, Destroyer of Ignorance, Bestower of Liberation, The Supreme Giver of Auspiciousness, Embodiment of Truth, Consciousness, and Bliss, the Sacred Mother of countless embodiments of Sai. the True Form of Sai Himself Victory to the Divine Scripture: Shri Sai Satcharita.",
    "Description": "इस दिव्य प्रवचन में कृष्णाजी बताते हैं कि साईबाबा ने “गुरु” शब्द को किस प्रकार गहन और सजीव अर्थ प्रदान किया।\nगुरु किसी एक धर्म, जाति या पंथ के नहीं होते – जैसे सूर्य का प्रकाश और वायु सबके लिए समान है, वैसे ही सच्चे गुरु का आशीर्वाद भी सबके लिए होता है। \n\n*साईसच्चरित अध्याय १२* में वर्णित मुळेशास्त्री की लीला इसका अद्भुत उदाहरण है। संशयग्रस्त वृत्ति से उन्होंने बाबा के हाथों की रेखा देखने का प्रयास किया, किंतु बाबा ने उन्हें उनके दिवंगत गुरु के ही साक्षात्‌ दर्शन देकर यह सिद्ध किया कि सच्चा सद्गुरु अपने शिष्य की श्रद्धा को उसके ही गुरु पर दृढ़ करता है। \n\nसाईबाबा ने हर भक्त को अपने दरबार में स्थान दिया, परंतु कभी किसी को अपनी ओर खींचा नहीं। उन्होंने भक्तों की भक्ति को उनके ही गुरु के चरणों में स्थापित किया और यही उनकी अद्वितीय विशेषता है।\nसच्चे सद्गुरु में द्वैतभाव नहीं होता; वे केवल आत्मा को परमात्मा से जोड़ने का कार्य करते हैं। \n\nभक्त पंत को भी बाबा ने यही उपदेश दिया कि “जहाँ कहीं भी जाओ, पर अपने गुरु की ही अनन्य भक्ति करो।” \n\nसाईबाबा ने “गुरु” शब्द का सार इस प्रकार उजागर किया कि उनका जीवन ही गुरु-तत्व का सजीव स्वरूप बन गया। \n\n🪷🪷🪷 \n\nIn this divine discourse, Krishnaji explains how Sai Baba gave profound and living meaning to the sacred word *Guru*.\nA true Guru does not belong to any one religion, sect, or community – just as the sunlight, air, and water belong to all, the blessings of a Sadguru are universal. \n\nIn **Sai Satcharitra, Chapter 12**, the story of Muleshastri beautifully illustrates this truth. With a doubtful mind, he wished to examine Baba’s palm, being well-versed in palmistry. But Baba, instead of allowing this, granted him the vision of his *departed Guru*, thereby proving that a true Sadguru always strengthens the disciple’s faith in his own Guru, rather than drawing him away. \n\nSai Baba welcomed every devotee into His darbar, yet never sought to attract anyone to Himself. Rather, He rooted their devotion firmly in their own Guru, and in doing so, He displayed a rare quality that is seldom seen even among great saints.\n\nA real Sadguru is beyond duality; He is the bridge uniting the soul with the Supreme. \n\nTo devotee Pant too, Baba gave the same eternal teaching: “Wherever you may go in this world, hold on firmly to the exclusive devotion of your own Guru.” \n\nSai Baba thus revealed the very essence of the word Guru – His life itself became the living embodiment of the Guru principle. \n\n#SaiBaba #Sadguru #GuruTattva #SaiSatcharitra #SaiLeela #GuruBhakti #SpiritualWisdom #SaiTeachings #DivineGrace #PathOfGuru …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saibaba, guru, sadguru, devotees, Saisatcharita, Shirdi, Shirdi\nKrishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, Saileela, Saileela Rahasy, youtube, spirituality, mere sai, Krishnaji Saibaba Video, sai, saibaba teaching",
    "Views": "3,608 views",
    "Likes": "355"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साईबाबा द्वारा नवविधा भक्ती की सच्ची व्याख्या - By Krishnaji",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9YXn7kRfSak",
    "Transcript": "This is no ordinary book; it is luminous advice. It is the autobiography of the Divine, narrated in His own words. Om Sai Ram In the 21st chapter of the Sai Satcharitra, there is a beautiful description of Nav Vidha Bhakti - the ninefold path of devotion. So today, let us reflect upon this subject of Nav Vidha Bhakti. Saints, sages, and enlightened beings have spoken and written extensively on this topic. You must already be aware of this. But as it is said, every person perceives things through their own experiences. So, what my eyes have seen, and what I have experienced in my own life regarding Nav Vidha Bhakti, that is what I shall share with you today. And I hope it will touch your hearts. Before delving into Nav Vidha Bhakti, let us first understand what devotion truly means. In Baba's view, what is devotion? Let us illuminate that a bit. Baba says,- 'What is devotion?' Devotion certainly does not mean being completely immersed in worldly affairs, and then sparing just five or ten minutes to stand before the Divine or the Sadguru, offering a few prayers or services, only to return to being entangled in the world for the remaining 23 or 24 hours. Baba does not consider that as devotion. In the 10th chapter of Sai Satcharitra, while explaining devotion, Baba says that wherever your mind is attached in the world be it wealth, children, spouse, possessions, your own beauty, or the ego of your position Wherever your mind is attached - be it your child, spouse, wealth, honor, or any other snare at the mental level - first withdraw your mind from all those places. This is Baba's definition of devotion, Wherever you are entangled in the world, wherever your mind is attached first withdraw your mind from all those places. Then, gather that collected mind and pour it at the feet of the Sadguru, so that only devotion to the Sadguru remains, forgetting everything else. If you can achieve this, Baba says, that is true devotion. That means, Baba straightforwardly declares, \"I do not want your divided love, where you devote to me on one side while remaining fully occupied with worldly activities on the other. You are completely submerged in the world, and only if you get five or ten minutes do you chant Sai Baba's name.\" Baba says that is not devotion. So, wherever your mind is attached, wherever you are entangled, first detach your mind from there, and then fix that gathered mind at the feet of the Sadguru. That will be called exclusive devotion, selfless devotion, true devotion. So, before reaching Nav Vidha Bhakti, let us be clear on what devotion is. In the 10th chapter, Baba says, \"Premachi nahi jayache thayi. Aisa manav honechi nahi.\" Meaning, there cannot be a human without love in their heart. It's just that for some, love is directed toward offspring; for others, toward spouse; for some, toward position; for others, toward their own body or adornments. Who knows where people's love is immersed? Because a human without love is unimaginable. Every person has love, but the object of that love varies. Human love is divided. We are all entangled - some in one thing, some in another. This is the bitter truth; we must accept it. Baba isn't saying this in vain in the 10th chapter. And He says, \"I do not want your divided love.\" I want pure love. So, wherever your mind is stuck, withdraw it first. If it's stuck in wife or husband, withdraw it. If in office, withdraw it. If in wrongful pursuits, withdraw it first. If stuck in children, in attachment to them, withdraw that attachment first. If stuck in illusion, in wealth, withdraw it. Gather the mind withdrawn from everywhere and fix it at my feet; that devotion will be unwavering, exclusive, and true. Baba says, in my vision, that is devotion. Kabir Ji expresses the same in his words: 'Jab lag nata jagat ka, tab lag bhakti na hoi' As long as you are bound to the world, you live, die or long just for the world. So, for such people Kabir Ji says, 'Jab lag nata jagat ka, tab lag bhakti na hoi. Nata tode Hari bhaje, bhagat kahave soi.' Break ties with the world and connect with the Guru; Kabir Ji says, only then is one a true devotee. We all pass through three stages in devotion. All of us. The first stage: I want only the world. We do a bit of devotion to God, but our intention is that nothing should lack in the world. That's why we worship the Sadguru, God, or deity. In other words, we use the Divine or Sadguru as a ladder, climbing on their chest to attain perishable worldly things. Please understand this well. 'I want only the world. ' From there, a little progress happens, a bit of discernment awakens, humanity stirs a little, the mind purifies somewhat. We gain the company of good people, satsang begins. Then we reach the second stage: We want God along with the world. Earlier, we said only the world; now, world plus God. But as sadhana increases, remembrance grows, better company is found, superior satsang take place, and we realize that selfless devotion is everything. Baba says, you must break ties with the world to become my true devotee. That settles in our every vein, we detach from the world and merge completely in Baba. At that time, every pore of our being says, \"I want only Baba.\" So, that is devotion. That is the original and exclusive devotion. Kabir Ji clarifies: 'Jab lag nata jagat ka, tab lag bhakti na hoi. Nata tode Hari bhaje, bhagat kahave soi.' Baba says the same, Kabir Ji says the same, all saints say the same. A true saint is never entangled in worldly illusions. This land is of Thakur Ramakrishna Paramahansa Ji If one is to learn devotion, who better than him? Who better as a Guru? What a devotion! This land has given two such priceless gems: Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, the incarnation of devotion itself, and Ramakrishna Dev. What devotion! Calling out to 'Mother', he would faint in ecstasy. How else can one detach from the world? Such pinnacle of devotion that uttering \"Mother\" once would induce samadhi. Today, we sit in that same place discussing devotion. This is the land of those great souls who taught us the importance of devotion. If darshan was not granted, they would weep, wail, pick up a sword: \"If Mother doesn't appear, I'll slit my throat.\" What level of devotion! That's why I say, those who don't know the essence of devotion - truly, I say - they are paupers. There is no one more pitiable in this world than one unaware of the importance of devotion. First, devotion must be selfless; second, it must be toward the Vast. How long will we remain limited to Baba's idol? How long confined to the statue of any deity? True devotion is when we transcend that and see His form in the entire Universe (His vast form). Wherever we look, only He resides. In every form, my Baba dwells. How can I engage in serving that Vast? How to serve Him? With all my strength, serve the person before you. Start from home, I always say. In our family, give comfort, respect, love, caring nature to all members. Live for them, die for them, sacrifice your selfishness Then, truly, in a few years, you will become worthy of exclusive devotion. Begin at home; if successful there, then extend outward. Wherever you see, Baba is there. In whatever form a person appears, an animal, an insect - my Baba resides in countless forms. Bow at their feet, provide whatever comfort you can. That is devotion in its vast form, devotion to the Vast. Baba says, you must reach there. Do not limit yourself to my picture or Shirdi. I do not dwell only in Shirdi. This entire universe is my form, the animate and inanimate is my manifestation. Devote to my Vast. Bow before my Vast form. Live and die for it. That is my true devotion. So, first, clarify what devotion is. And one who receives the gift of devotion knows its bliss. What state of emotion it is. Words cannot describe it. Impossible. Even Vedas and scriptures are silent on it. It is a matter of experience. Until experienced, it won't be understood. If I ask, what is the purpose of your life? Your goal? Target? Aim? It should come in a second: \"We want exclusive devotion to our Sadguru. We live for it, die for it.\" If answering takes more than a second, truly, we are not awakened. We lack full awareness. If it takes more than a second, One who knows its essence won't take a second. \"Exclusive devotion is what I want. I live for it, die for it.\" That will be the answer. Now, coming to the story of Anantrao Patankar in the 21st chapter. Because until that leela unfolds, I cannot lead you into Nav Vidha Bhakti. In the 21st chapter of Sai Satcharitra, there is the story of Anantrao Patankar. Anantrao Patankar is a scholar of scriptures. He has studied six shastras, four Vedas, Puranas, deepest philosophical knowledge - all understood. But his mind has not a moment's peace. So restless, beyond limits. And even read a lot of things, that too beyond limits. Perhaps for such people, Kabir Ji says, \"Pothi padh padh jag mua, pandit bhaya na koi. Dhai akshar prem ka, padhe so pandit hoi.\" If that devotion, those two-and-a-half letters of love and devotion, haven't descended into your heart, Then you are neither a pandit nor a human. Anantrao Patankar is such a boundless scholar, having read all necessary texts. But not a moment's peace. He wanders everywhere for peace, but finds none. Finally, fortune awakens, good days arrive, he learns of Baba, reaches Shirdi, has darshan, And with folded hands, prays from the heart: \"O Sadguru, What kind of life is this? I have interest in spirituality. I want to earn only spirituality in life. Live for spirituality, die for it. But, nothing has come to me. I am a mere pauper.\" With tears in his eyes, he says, \"These simple, innocent devotees bowed at your feet, the peace in their pure-hearted, guileless devotion that I see I have wasted my entire life seeking that peace, but it eludes me despite reading so much, sifting through scriptures. Grant my mind a few moments of peace.\" He begs Baba. And Baba, being Baba, Says, \"I will tell you a story. If you understand it, peace is yours.\" He says, \"Yes, tell me, Baba.\" So, Baba says, \"There was a merchant. Before him, a mare dropped nine dung balls. The merchant, being thirsty, ran and gathered all nine dung balls, and thus attained peace. The treasure of peace descended into his heart.\" He gets astonished \"What story is this? Who is the merchant? What is the mare? The mare dropped nine dung balls. He gathered them and gained peace\" He doesn't understand. So, he asks one of Baba's intimate devotees: \"What is this riddle Baba spoke?\" The devotee says, \"As far as my intellect comprehends, The mare is God's grace, and the nine droppings are symbols of Nav Vidha Bhakti. If you adopt Nav Vidha Bhakti in your life, if the ninefold devotion descends, the treasure of peace and bliss will enter your heart.\" He understands and fully accepts: \"Truly, in my life, I used 100% brain. But not at all the heart. What are heart's sensitivities? What are feelings? What are noble sentiments? Never stood before God shedding tears. A true devotee knows the value of those tears. He must have thought, 'I never lived the eight sattvic emotions, I never experienced the trembling, the tears, the melting of the heart that are signs of true love for God. I never experienced such sattvic states.' I gathered knowledge. Sharpened my intellect. But left my heart utterly impoverished. I never paid attention to my heart, mind, intellect. What are noble sentiments? What are emotions? What are feelings? I don't know. Baba's words pierced the heart, 'Baba has pinpointed it. Truly, I labor 100% on the external, but inwardly, I am a pauper.' So, Baba is right: from today, I must fill myself with devotional emotions. Then peace and bliss will come to my life. He understands it. The next day, sitting in Dwarkamai before Baba, Baba asks, \"Have you gathered the nine balls?\" Anantrao Patankar replies, \"Baba, where is my capacity to gather them by my own strength? Only if you shower mercy and grace will Nav Vidha Bhakti descend into my life. I pray from the heart, Baba, instill Nav Vidha Bhakti in my life. Once it descends, no troubles will remain in life. No desires for anything. I will feel complete every moment. Incompleteness will vanish from life. With no incompleteness, where is room for negative emotions like unrest?\" He prays to Baba and departs with blessings. Now, I ask one question: Baba gave an example, it's the story of the mare's dung. The mare excretes dung, and gathering the nine dung balls purifies the mind and brings peace. That's what the story says. So, what is the essence of this leela? Baba could have referred to some other 9 things, like giving Rs. 9 to Lakshmibai Shinde at his last breath. But why the story of the mare's nine droppings? Baba wants to tell us all: If you want devotion in life, you must become very humble, lay yourself down, bring yourself very low. No room for ego to raise its head. Those who know the essence and importance of exclusive devotion, if today Baba stands embodied before us and a mare drops nine dung balls right there, If Baba says, \"If you pick them up and eat them, I will instill Nav Vidha Bhakti in your life,\" not a second should be wasted in consuming them. Because one who knows the depth of Nav Vidha Bhakti, its essence, won't delay a second. Picking up is far; if Baba says eat, not a second's delay in putting it in the mouth. Such humility, such art of laying down, such egolessness, such self-abnegation until they come into life, Until you see the Divine in every atom, lay down without seeing differences in beings. Every person is greater than me. Every creature is greater than me. Because my Baba dwells in them. Until such humility arrives, Nav Vidha Bhakti won't enter life. So, Baba conveyed this. That's why the example of the mare's dung as a symbol. Otherwise, why need to pick dung? One must lay down that much, be that humble, attain that egolessness. Then it becomes possible. Nav Vidha Bhakti, otherwise it's next to impossible. Now, we come to the nine types of Nav Vidha Bhakti. What are the nine? You know: Shravana, Kirtana, Vishnu Smarana, Charana Sevana, Archana, Vandana, Dasyam, Sakyam, Atma Nivedanam. These are the nine types of devotion. The first is Shravana Bhakti. Shravana Bhakti is very important; that's why it's placed first among the nine types of devotion. If Shravana enters your life, you learn to live. If listening is understood, you learn to live. Whom to listen to? Where to give time? Whom not to listen to? If this clarity comes, you have won half the battle. Half the war won, because in Nav Vidha Bhakti, the first is Shravana Bhakti - listening. But the question is, whom will you listen to? The market is full, Overflowing with speakers. Everyone seems right. If there, you use your eternal discrimination and start listening to the right person. If by fortune, a right person enters your life and you listen continuously, you have won half the war. Half the task done. Not a small thing. Such true people come by great fortune. Very rarely. By great fortune, such people come. Shravana Bhakti Now, see this body. The body has many parts, right? Eyes, ears, mouth, nose, skin, hands, feet. Countless parts. But among all, which is the most important? If I ask, it's the mouth. If food enters the mouth, that energy reaches all senses. If no food for eight days, eyes won't see, Nose won't smell, Ears won't hear. Nothing. You'll faint. Each sense will start failing. So, just as to keep all body parts strong, food must enter the mouth, Similarly, if you want to fully instill Nav Vidha Bhakti in life, Shravana Bhakti is like the mouth. As the mouth is principal among parts, Shravana is principal in Nav Vidha Bhakti. You must listen to the right person. Connect with the right person. If that clarity isn't in your life, then it's not Shravana. As mouth among body parts, Shravana in Nav Vidha Bhakti. And here, it's not about speaking, but listening. Often in life, we have a bad habit: we speak more, listen less. But Shravana Bhakti teaches: speak less, listen more. Truly, I say, one who is sparing in speech, Eliminates 70% of problems before they arise. 70% of problems. One who speaks less, Eliminates problems before they enter life, because speaks less. The more one speaks, the more entangled. This is the fact. And before whom to speak? Whom to listen to - this clarity must be. If the person before you is even slightly better, bow your head and listen. That is Shravana Bhakti. Not necessary only to listen to God's glories. It becomes mechanical. No doubt, glorifying Him is primary, but beyond that, wherever you meet someone better in life, Close eyes, bow head, listen to that person's words from the heart. Give respect, because illuminating words are coming. There's a saying: As the company, so the color. If listening comes well, living comes. Here today, how many mothers, parents are sitting. They always complain to me: our child doesn't study. No matter how much we say, doesn't study. Don't bother so much. Befriend the child with the smart one in school or class. In six months, he will automatically start studying. Don't chase. Provide company. Firstly, company of a good person comes by great fortune. But if found, you can't imagine how beautifully it works. So, as company, so the hue. This is the fact. Half the journey is covered. If Shravana Bhakti, listening ascends- whom to listen? You listen to four people. First, your eternal discrimination must work: who is right? This one is right, that one too. Who is most right? Choice Because time is limited. Time is short. We all have limited time. So, one must choose. Listen to the best of best. Don't waste life. Sometimes, to measure a person's depth, to know or test it. If a friend or acquaintance, just ask one thing: \"In your life, who is the person in contact whom you respect greatly. See with ideal eyes.\" If answering takes 5 minutes, 2-3 minutes, know that their mind isn't purified yet. And if answers in seconds, rattles off four names, \"These are very good. A crore times better than me. One in office, one neighbor, one classmate.\" Know that, this person's progress no one can stop in this world. No one can stop. So, Shravana means not only listening to God's glories. I'm explaining a bit broadly, Because, when it comes to listening God's glories, you go to satsang, katha, you'll be influenced for that time, then home returning back into the world. I’m not talking about that. I'm talking of practical spirituality. 24/7 your spirituality must be alive. That's what I'm saying. Wherever a superior person appears, Lay down That is Shravana Bhakti. Now, for us, many people are there, but for us, the biggest source of Shravana Bhakti is Sai Satcharita. This is our source for Shravana Bhakti. About Sai Satcharitra, there's a verse in this 21st chapter. Verse 126 'Agadh Sainathancha mahima, Agadh tayanchya katha parma, Agadh Saicharitrachi seema, Moort parabrahmavatar' What a verse! This granth is called the incarnation of Parabrahma, and that too living Parabrahma incarnation. He says about this granth: 'Agadh Sainathancha mahima' The glory of Sainath is unfathomable, infinite, inaccessible, imperceptible. Not easily understandable, that glory is unfathomable. 'Agadh Sainathancha mahima, Agadh tayanchya katha parma,' Each story, leela is inaccessible, imperceptible, unfathomable. Perhaps you can measure the ocean's depth, but maybe not the depth of those leelas - so deep. 'Agadh Sainathancha mahima, Agadh tayanchya katha parma, Agadh Saicharitrachi seema,' and its boundary, The depth and boundary of each leela makes ocean's depth pale, sky's expanse insufficient. So, unfathomable is its boundary. And further: ' Moort parabrahmavatar' This granth is the incarnation of Parabrahma, and 'moort' means living. Live Guru Not speaking of person, not Baba's body, not his form - 'moort Parabrahmavatar' Speaking of this granth. Living Parabrahma. So, if we listen to this granth, try to understand its depth, Baba is ever-ready to explain that depth to us. So, this was Shravana Bhakti, first type of devotion. Very important. I say again, in Nav Vidha Bhakti, the first Shravana Bhakti is very important. If you embrace it well, the other eight come automatically. It's the engine. The train's engine. The other eight types of devotion are compartments. Just attach to engine. Compartments automatically follow the path. So, I call Shravana Bhakti the engine. This is the essence of Shravana Bhakti. Now, we take the second: Kirtana Bhakti. Very important devotion. As soon as we say Kirtana, our mind flashes to bhajans, kirtan, gathering, musicians, music, tabla - all that. No doubt, that's one way of Kirtana. Kirtana means glorifying, singing praises, extolling glories, describing virtues. So that our heart melts. Singing of glory is Kirtana. But now, the question is: When someone sings Kirtana or listeners, if they drown only in music, if music compels swaying, that's mere beginning of Kirtana. The tune is so good, what music, compels you to sway, shake, dance. Nowadays, in bhajan evenings, it often happens. People enjoy a lot. It's not wrong. But a mere beginning. Because the depth of the sung Kirtana must touch our heart. The singer must, after singing, explain the depth to the audience. Then, from body to soul, the Kirtana will reach; otherwise, it dies at the body. Are you understanding what I'm saying? This body, is the Kirtana with musicians, music creates atmosphere. Good. People sway, dance, whirl. Let it be. But that's temporary enthusiasm. Mere body. Soul untouched yet. Soul is touched when each word of Kirtana is understood. Its depth understood. We dive in its depth. Because Baba has a verse in 15th Chapter. Let me read it fully. 'Na ghade jeneni malakshalan, tyate kaay mhanave saban, Na kare je avidya nirasan, te kaay shravan mhanave' If a soap cannot wash body dirt, do we call it soap? Similarly, if someone narrates, tells, but its depth doesn't touch your heart, can you call it Kirtana or Shravana? Absolutely not possible. So, Kirtana means, The singer, definitely sing in rhythm, melody, well, because it has its own importance. When sung in rhythm and melody, it reaches hearts. But still, that's only body; not the soul of Kirtana. From body, subtler mind. From mind, subtler intellect. From intellect, subtler soul. So, there is a long journey. Kirtana must go from body to soul. It will only when each word stirs your heart. Depth comes to understanding. Heart melts. Tears flow from eyes. Then it blossoms. And in praising, don't be stingy. Whoever comes before you, who is superior, praise from heart. It is the sign of mind purification. That is Kirtana. Original Kirtana in my view. Because often we refuse to accept that superiors exist right before us. Ego doesn't allow. So, this is original Kirtana. And as for Guru's Kirtana, if we don't do it, we aren't human. Be so immersed in Baba's devotion That unaware, my tongue utters only His praise. I mention only Him. Whoever comes, I babble about Baba, unaware. I can't sit a moment without speaking of Baba. Any topic I talk about is Baba. Like Baba gave Rs. 55 to Haji Siddique Falke. That's the 55th sutra of Naradiya Bhakti Sutra. It says, once that devotion is attained, he sees only the Divine, everywhere. Heart desires only to hear Him. Only talk about Him. Only contemplate Him. If you have reached that state, you truly live Kirtana Bhakti. So, this is second: Kirtana Bhakti. Now, third: Vishnu Smarana. Understand this well. Vishnu Smarana is said. Not Vishnu Ratan (cramming) There is heaven and earth difference. In rote repetition, tongue is involved. But in remembrance, along with tongue, mind is involved. Here, Baba said remembrance of Vishnu, not rote repetition of His name. Clear: when taking the name, it must fully settle in mind and brain. Not rote name. Name remembrance. Because mocking this, Kabir Ji says: \"Mala pherat yug bhaya, Mita na man ka pher. Karka manka chod de, Man ka manka pher.\" What a couplet! Clarifies. He says, turning mala, an age passed, not one life, an age. Mala runs in hand. Not one life, many lives make an age. Look at the choice of words, \"Mala pherat yug gaya, Mita na man ka pher\" But mind is unchanged, not purified, not attained that state. \"Mala pherat yug bhaya, Mita na man ka pher. Karka manka chod de, Man ka manka pher.\" Drop the mala from your hand, learn to take name from mind. Let mind engage in name. You engaged only tongue. Tongue alone won't work. Mind must engage. And for that to happen, wherever mind is unnecessarily attached, withdraw it. Then mind will fix on Baba. Otherwise, it is impossible. And in another couplet Kabir Ji says, \"Mala to kar mein phire, Jeebh phire mukh mahi, Manwa to chahu disi phire, Ye to sumiran nahi\" What a clarity! Mala turns in hand \"Mala to kar mein phire\" Tongue turns in mouth - 'Om Sai Ram....'. \"Jeebh phire mukh mahi\" But mind roams the universe. \"Manwa to chahu dishi phire, ye to sumiran nahi\" This isn't remembrance. You're trapped. Wasting time needlessly. Engage your mind in that Name. Don't do duplicate name remembrance. Do, the original remembrance. So, Vishnu Smarana. And one more couplet of Kabir Ji, Kabir Ji says, \"Bheekh fakiri seekhni, Paniharin se seekh, Baat kare sakhiyan se, Dhyan gagar ke beech\" If Begging of fakirism, Bliss of dispassion, bliss of devotion—if to learn its manner,learn from pariharan. Who go to distant places, fill four-five pots on head, bring home water called pariharan. Learn from pariharan if depth of devotion to learn, Kabir Ji says They go with friends. Come with friends. Talk worldly. What I didn't say in Shravana, they do all. All talks. Every kind. My mother-in-law this, sister-in-law that. This problem, that neighbor this, that one that. Heard about him? His problem. This one's affair, that one's. All talks. But not a moment's distraction from the pot. \"Baat kare sakhiyan se, dhyan gagar ke beech.\" Attention on pot midst. Similarly, perform all worldly duties. Go office, do work. Fulfill home responsibilities. Care for children. But while doing all, not forget Sadguru for a moment. That is original Smarana Bhakti. \"Nainan andar aao to\" \"Nayan jhap to lun\" \"Nainan andar aao to, nain jhap tohe lu, na main dekhun Auran ko na tohe dekhan doon\" What Kabir Ji! Like a beloved says to lover: \"Nainan andar aao to, once come settle in my eyes\" \"Nain jhap\" meaning close eyes after you settle. And absorb you inside. \"Nain jhapi mund kar tohe lun\" take you inside. \"Na main dekhun auran ko\" because eyes closed, I won't see world. \"Na tohe dekhan doon\" nor let you see anyone. Authoritative voice. This is Smarana. What beautiful scene. Majnu is. Wandering desert calling Laila Laila. So mad in Laila's love, remembers nothing. But in same desert, perhaps prayer time. Faces Kaaba, sits in prayer. And Laila passes before him. He shouts: O infidel, O atheist! Don't you know someone is praying here? How can you pass before me? Majnu says: I am so lost in my Laila's love that neither world nor your God remembers. I was just going Laila Laila. But you sit in worship of that God who made my Laila. From Him, my Laila a crore times less, directly you worship the Lord, how did you notice someone passed before you? Head in prostration, surrendered to Lord, and mind on world. If this is worship, if this is prayer, my love is a crore times better. So he says. So he says. Then finally says: Head in prostration, mind on worldly thoughts. If such worship, brother, my love better than your worship. Words pierce the maulana, accepts: No, your love taught me worship. So, Vishnu Smarana not Ratana. Often, a person fully engrossed in Sadguru's memory.Completely immersed. But name not on tongue. It will do. Even if name not on tongue, but fully in contemplation. But name not on tongue, 100% fine. But name on tongue, if Baba not in mind, won't do. Name Smarana people take very technically. If you take name long time, it goes to ajapa state. Doesn't prove remembrance. You habituated tongue. So climbs tongue effortlessly. But mind engagement essential. That's why I say, even if their memory, remembrance, contemplation unbroken but name not on tongue, 100% fine. But name on tongue, singing bhajans, kirtan. But if not in unbroken contemplation of Sadguru, useless. But in unbroken contemplation of Sadguru even if name not on tongue, 100% fine. Ok? Meaning that's why not said name ratan. Said name smarana. Difference understood. Ok? Now fourth devotion. Three done: Shravana, Kirtana, Vishnu Smarana. Charana Sevana. For Charana Sevana, in 39th chapter, Baba gave long satsang on a Bhagavad Gita shloka, recorded in two chapters. Tad viddhi Pranipatena, pariprashnenaSevaya upadekshyanti te Gyanam , gyaninas Tattva darshinah . In that, Who has right to ask questions? Lord Krishna tells Arjuna, explains. One fully surrendered before me, laid down, humble, thirsty in mind to know. No ill intent to know. Not to test if this one knows. No right to ask with that intent. Ask with thirst, yearning to know. And then says, right to ask comes when you have pleased them by long service. Then you have right to ask. Today if such conditions imposed, neither speaker nor listener left. But Krishna says such deep thing. And Baba tells Nana Saheb Chandorkar: Service doesn't mean today my mind good, in mood, serve well. Today entangled in worldly troubles, in pain, skip. Not called service. My birth itself for Sadguru's service. One with such firm conviction understands fourth devotion: Charana Sevana. I play a video. Please watch carefully. From Ramayana. What is service? Understand well. Once I tell the context so you connect. Context: Kaikeyi asked two boons. Rama and Sita's exile fixed. Sita says I too go. Take her along. Younger brother Lakshmana comes. Insists: No brother, where you are, I am. Like shadow always behind you. Can't sit in palace. I too go. Then Sumitra Ji comes. Rama says: You insist on going to forest but what will mother Sumitra say? Then Sumitra Ji says what will Sumitra say? Where Rama is, there Lakshmana. You go means and you serve them unbroken. Teaching service dharma, mother Sumitra's advice to Lakshmana truly deep. \"You are going, son, but remember — the most difficult duty in the world is service.\" Wholeheartedly, its not that easy. Stay with them like shadow. Not leave them alone even a moment. Second If they have eaten, if something left, then eat. If they sleep, guard. And thorns on their path, pick with your eyelashes. Now, picking with eyelashes means what? So she says: crises coming in brother and sister-in-law's life, anticipate beforehand Keep intellect so sharp, understand crisis before it comes. This impending crisis tomorrow may trouble my brother and sister-in-law this way. So eliminate before reaching them. Be that alert. And that is service. And I want to say emphatically. Serving Baba's vast rather than idol worship, idol pooja—they will dance. Wherever see, only He. So this is Charana Seva, fourth devotion. In Guru Charitra second chapter, Deepak Akhyan. Superb story. No better example for service. Once disciple deeply connected to Guru. One day Guru tells Deepak: O Deepak Now I feel like going to Kashi. But you know why I go to Kashi? My sins are piled high. And those sins will wash only in Kashi. Kashi's Vishwanath will bedridden me for 21 years Make me ill, strike paralysis. I'll be paralyzed 21 years. Will you serve me? Deepak says: By your grace, definitely Guru Dev. Then come. 21 years, not one or two days And truly as said, body victim of paralysis. Struck lame. Bedridden, excrete in place, he cleans, bathes, dresses Grind flour, cook, feed Every service, and if not to Guru's mind, scolds Such is service. If no service, leave. But doesn't leave. Finally Shiva sees what service. Rushes down Stands before Deepak: I am so pleased with your Guru devotion. Ask what you want. Says: I want nothing. If truly you want to give, I want you heal my Guru Dev. Then thinks: Guru said came to Kashi to atone sins. Is his wish to heal or not, must ask. Tells Shiva Ji: Wait a minute, I ask my Guru Dev. Goes asks Guru Dev: Shiva Ji came. Gave darshan. Standing outside. Says ask boon. My wish: ask your health. Fool, if no service, leave. You'll destroy my merit. What I told? Must suffer 21 years. Want to escape my karmas. If no service, leave. But tell Shiva Ji leave. Poor one fears, goes pranams: Shiva Ji my Guru not agreeing, you go. Resumes service, same abuses, rejections but continues. Then after some years Vishnu Ji comes. Vishnu Ji says: Very pleased with your Guru devotion, ask what. Says: Last time Shiva came. Ate big scoldings. I want nothing. My Guru keeps me as is. Besides I can't ask even about my Guru. Now that's clear too, please go. No no, came so will give something. Ask something. Then Deepak says: Ok want to give? Today with what devotion faith I serve my Guru, give a crore times more devotion faith in Guru's feet so I serve crore times more. Just that said, Vishnu vanishes. Inner Guru stands . manifest: You passed the test. This is service. And service not mental, body too scorched. It's not that easy so this is Charana Seva. Not easy As Sumitra Ji tells Lakshmana, toughest dharma is service dharma. Fifth devotion: Archana Bhakti. See, Archana Bhakti is symbol of total surrender. Where everything offered to Divine, nothing left—that is Archana Bhakti. Because in others, one body part involved. In Smarana, mind; Shravana, ears; Kirtana, mouth. But in Archana, mind must concentrate. Body too, mind too, service happening, pooja happening. Imagine an idol worship is taking place, so you are bathing them, you are performing abhishek (ritualistic pouring of liquids) you are adorning them with clothes and ornaments, you are applying tilak, applying sandalwood paste with musk. So whatever it is, it must be done with complete devotion, with the mind, and you must completely immerse your body. So, in a way, Archana Bhakti (worship through offering) is complete devotion. The body is involved, the mind is involved, and wealth is also involved. What is called Sarvasva Sharanagati (complete surrender) comes under Archana Bhakti. Now, I'm just remembering an incident from some years ago. Some years ago, there were some people in our group who are connected to me. They were very intellectual. I won't take their names. They were highly intellectual, meaning their intellect worked very well. Their heart was also good, but they didn't have the habit of performing such rituals and worship. So, I called all three of them and told them that they would go to Shirdi, bring back Baba's padukas , and worship them every day. How much they are doing it, I don't know. But keeping their nature in mind, I told them this so that their body would also engage in the service of the Guru. This means, the devotion where body, mind, and wealth are completely engaged, that is Archana Bhakti. Complete. So, Archana Bhakti is not that easy. The worship of the deity's idol is not that easy. Everything gets involved in it. Now, look, I'll give an example. There is a producer who produces a film, who makes a film by investing crores of rupees. He has a story in his mind. So, he goes to the director. Then he tells the director that this is the story, \"I want to make a film. This is the subject.\" So the director says, \"Okay, it's a very good story. I'll take it.\" Then he selects the writers, he selects the actors, he selects the musicians, he selects the screenplay writers. So, after bringing all these people, he then narrates the story to the actor, saying, \"This is the story.\" He implants all the nuances into the actors, and in the end, he takes the performance from the actor. So, from the writer to the musician, from the producer to the director, where do all those people descend? They descend into the actor Because he has heard everything. He has absorbed everything \"The producer wants this, the director wants this, the cameraman wants this, the writer wants this. But when he internalizes everything and then gives the performance, that becomes the focal point/essence (Archan). It means all those things have come into the actor. Similarly, when all the goodness, all the emotions,knowledge, and devotion all descend into the body and flow out as the power of action (Kriya Shakti) at the feet of the Sadguru, that is Archana Bhakti. Complete devotion. So, after reaching that point, the next devotion is Vandana Bhakti (worship through salutation). Look, another meaning of Vandan is Naman (bowing). Bowing is Vandana Bhakti. We call bowing Vandan. But if we take Naman and split the word it is Na+Man. Meaning, not my mind, not my will. Your will. The day you begin to understand the will of the Sadguru, and start living according to it, even if you have to suppress your own mind, then you have entered Vandana Bhakti. Vandana Bhakti absolutely doesn't mean standing with folded hands or falling at the feet. No, that is very easy. It is very easy to drop your body like a log at the feet of the Sadguru. But to live by holding his will supreme, that is the original Vandana Bhakti. I hope I am able to explain it to you well. Na Man – not my mind, (1:14:18) not my will, Your will. The day this comes, consider that Vandana Bhakti has entered your life. And if you are living by holding his will supreme, then you are in Vandana Bhakti 24/7. Bowing for one moment is very easy, but you are performing Vandan 24/7,because you are living your life according to his will. And Dasya Bhakti (devotion as a servant). Kabir ji says about Das Bhakti (servitude) \"It is difficult to be called a Das (servant), I am the servant of servants. Now I have become like the grass under the feet.\" It is difficult to be called a servant, saying \"servant\" is truly difficult. I am the servant of even the servants. Now I have become so humble, like the grass under the feet.\" I have achieved such humility that I have become like a blade of grass which the world crushes as it walks over it. The whole world tramples over me. I have become that humble. That is Dasya Bhakti. It means Kabir ji is directly saying that even before becoming the servant of my Baba, I should become the servant of the servant of my Baba. I don't have the right to become Baba's servant directly. But the intimate devotee of my Baba, who is very closely connected to my Baba, I will become his servant. Then my Baba will be more happy. He will be more pleased. Just like, if you go to serve him directly, Baba turns you away. But if you go to serve his servant, he is overjoyed and starts dancing. The proof of this is the 11th chapter. Whenever any devotee had to go to Baba, they never went to Baba directly. They would first seek a recommendation from Shyama ji. They would make Shyama an intermediary, and only when they went with Shyama's support did Baba allow them inside . He would give permission So, in Dasya Bhakti, Baba is telling us that you won't be able to reach me directly. Those who are very close to me, who are among my very intimate devotees, you surrender to them. You will reach me very quickly. Let that humility enter within you. \"Now I have become like the grass under the feet.\" Let that much humility come inside you. You will see, I will be overjoyed and your work will be done quickly. But it is not easy to bring that much humility. That is also true. It is not that easy to bring that much humility. But if it comes, then the work will be done in a snap. So this is Dasya Bhakti. Now look, this was the seventh devotion. These seven types of the nine forms of devotion illustrate the effort of the devotee. Up to this point, it explains how the devotee must keep his mind and perform devotion. Up to these seven forms of devotion. Now, if a person has reached this far, the next two devotions that the Sadguru gives are the Sadguru's gift (prasad). It is the grace of the Sadguru. It is the reward from the Sadguru. This devotee has followed these first seven devotionsso well. So, as a result, the Sadguru is now giving a reward from his side, saying that this person has performed such high devotion as I wished. He has lived as I wished, he has done devotion as I wished. So, as a result, now I will honor him with two more devotions. And those are Sakhya Bhakti (devotion as a friend) and Atma Nivedanam Bhakti (self-surrender). This is a gift from the Sadguru. So the Sadguru says, \"From today onwards, you are not my servant, not my devotee, not my disciple, but I make you my friend (Sakha).\" He lifts the person who has fallen at his feet and embraces him. And says, \"From this moment, you are my friend. You are my friend.\" And who is saying this? God is saying it. Can you imagine? What is the meaning of being called a friend? If God Himself makes a devotee his friend, what is the significance of that? It means he lifts the person who was lying at his feet and embraces him, and says, \"Until today, you were striving, you were meditating on me, but from today onwards, I will meditate on you because you are my friend. And you have incurred a debt on me by performing those seven kinds of devotion again and again. You have put such a debt on me that now if I have to be free from that debt, there is only one way: O devotee, from today, I consider you my friend, and from today onwards, I will meditate on you.\" That is what being a Sakha is Je Je Animesh Chintit Sai, Prachiti paha chi Navlai, Svayam Sai tayasi dhyai Utarai, Tayachi This is the verse from the 37th chapter. It says, those who continuously meditate on the Sadguru, those who never forget the Sadguru even for a moment, I take the devotion of such people upon my head as a debt. And until I also meditate on you with the same continuous intensity, I cannot be free from my debt. This is the word of the Sadguru. And if he starts meditating on us like that, then we have become a friend. Now, why will he meditate like that? To make us like himself, to make us as complete as himself, to establish us in the form of Satchidananda like himself, he makes us a friend. \"From today onwards, my form is your form. My knowledge is your knowledge. My detachment is your detachment. My devotion is your devotion. Now there will be no difference between the two of us.\" Look at the couplet: Kabira maan nirmal bhaya, jaise Ganga neer. Piche piche Hari phire, kahat Kabir, Kabir. This is the Sakha. This is the true devotion. It means that by performing these seven kinds of devotion for years and years, the devotee has become so pure, so untainted, that now Hari (God) runs after me, calling \"Kabir, Kabir,\", he is remembering me. So this is Sakhya Bhakti. Now, why does he meditate on the disciple or the devotee? To give his completeness. So that there is no difference between the two. To establish non-duality (Advaita), to eliminate duality, that \"I and you are not separate. We are both one. I who am the complete Supreme Brahman, that is what you are. From today onwards, I give you the Soham Diksha (initiation into 'I am He'). So you keep experiencing that.\" So after that, he gives all his power and makes the devotee like himself. Making him like himself means that just as the Supreme Being is complete, he makes the devotee equally complete. And that is Atma Nivedanam Bhakti (devotion of self-surrender), the final devotion. Where the devotee and God are no longer separate. The disciple and the Guru are no longer separate. They become one. In the third chapter, there is a verse that says: Kitki se hi bhramar dhyan tene tilave bhramar ban (Just as the small insect meditating on the bumblebee, becomes a bumblebee itself) It means, the small insect meditating on the bumblebee, by humming along, flies away as a bumblebee itself. Similarly, the Sadguru, by meditating on the disciple, makes him a Sadguru. Makes him the lord of the universe. So that is Atma Nivedanam So, in a way, if you look at it, these nine forms of devotion include devotion, action, and knowledge; it is complete. If one can live it with great depth, then there are nine forms of devotion, but it includes action, knowledge, yoga, everything. But if we can live it with the same subtlety as it has been explained, then this is the Navavidha Bhakti. Sai Satcharitra Jaykara(cheering) Manohari, Shap-tap nivarani, Agnan nashini, Moksha dayini, Param kalyankari, Sachidanand pradayini, anant koti Sainathon ki janani, sakshat Sai swarupini, Victory to the supreme and divine text, Shri Sai Satcharitra, the mother of infinite Sai Nathas, the one who is the form of Sai Himself",
    "Description": "यह वीडियो कृष्णाजी द्वारा प्रस्तुत एक गहन आध्यात्मिक व्याख्या है जिसमें नवविधा भक्ति के महत्व को सरल और हृदयस्पर्शी रूप में समझाया गया है। इसमें साईबाबा की भक्ति की व्याख्या करते हुए बताया गया है कि सच्ची भक्ति क्या है और उसका साधक के जीवन पर कैसा प्रभाव पड़ता है। संत कबीर के अमर दोहे  के माध्यम से यह स्पष्ट किया गया है कि जब तक मनुष्य का लगाव जगत से जुड़ा है, तब तक वह ईश्वर को पूर्णतः नहीं पा सकता, और केवल ग्रंथ पढ़ने से नहीं बल्कि उसे आत्मसात करने से ही भक्ति का सार प्राप्त होता है।\nइस प्रवचन में भक्ति के तीन स्थरों की व्याख्या भी की गई है, जो साधक को क्रमशः सांसारिक बंधनों से मुक्त कर परमात्मा के समीप ले जाते हैं। साथ ही श्री साईसच्चरित अध्याय २१ में वर्णित अनंतराव पाटणकर की लीला का उल्लेख किया गया है, जो हमें साईबाबा की कृपा और भक्ति की गहन शक्ति का अनुभव कराता है। \nश्री साईसच्चरित की कई लीलाओं की माध्याम से यह संपूर्ण प्रवचन हमें भक्ती, वैराग्य और आत्मानुभव के वास्तविक मार्ग की ओर ले जाता है और जीवन में सच्चे संत-सद्गुरु के महत्व को उजागर करता है।\n\n🪷🪷🪷\n2:08 साईबाबा की भक्ती की व्याख्या\n6:46 संत कबीर दोहा ( जब लग नाता जगत का )\n7:30 भक्ती के ३ स्थर \n15:17 श्री साईसच्चरित अध्याय २१ अनंतराव पाटणकर लीला \n15:58 संत कबीर दोहा ( पोथी पढ पढ जग मुआ )\n23:47 नवविधा भक्तीका प्रतीक घोडीकी लीद क्यो ?\n26:33 श्रवण भक्ती\n35:55 श्रीसाईसच्चरित अध्याय २१, ओवी १२६\n39:06 किर्तन भक्ती\n41:59 श्रीसाईसच्चरित अध्याय १५, ओवी ४४\n45:40 विष्णुस्मरण भक्ती\n46:36 संत कबीर दोहा (माला फेरत युग भया)\n48:12 संत कबीर दोहा (माला तो कर में फिरे )\n49:37 संत कबीर दोहा (भीख फकीरी सीखनी)\n51:38 संत कबीर दोहा (नैना अंतर आव तू)\n58:33 चरणसेवन भक्ती\n1:04:06 गुरुचरित्र दिपक आख्यान कहानी\n1:09:03 अर्चन भक्ती\n1:13:14 वंदन भक्ती\n1:14:55 दास्य भक्ती\n1:15:16 संत कबीर दोहा (दास कहावन कठिन है)\n1:18:43 सख्य भक्ती\n1:20:11 श्रीसाईसच्चरित अध्याय ३७, ओवी ९१\n1:21:21 संत कबीर दोहा ( कबीरा मन निर्मल भया)\n1:22:38 आत्मनिवेदन भक्ती\n1:22:50 श्रीसाईसच्चरित अध्याय ३, ओवी १०६\n🪷🪷🪷\n\nThis video, presented by Krishnaji, is a deep spiritual discourse that explains the significance of *Navavidha Bhakti (the nine forms of devotion)* in a simple yet heart-touching way. It elaborates on Sai Baba’s teachings about devotion, highlighting what true devotion really means and how it transforms the life of a seeker. Through the immortal couplets of Saint Kabir, it is revealed that as long as one remains attached to worldly ties, attaining God is not possible, and that the essence of devotion cannot be realized by merely reading scriptures but by truly absorbing and living their wisdom.\n\nThe discourse also sheds light on the **three stages of devotion, which gradually free the seeker from worldly attachments and lead him closer to the Divine. It further recounts the story of Anant Rao Patankar from **Shri Sai Satcharitra, Chapter 21**, showing how Sai Baba’s grace manifests through faith and devotion.\n\nThrough several divine episodes from the **Shri Sai Satcharitra**, this entire narration guides us on the path of true devotion, detachment, and self-realization, while also revealing the eternal importance of a true saint and Sadguru in spiritual life.\n\n#SaiBaba #NavavidhaBhakti #SaiLeela #SaiSatcharitra #SaiKripa #BhaktiMarg #SadguruKripa #SpiritualWisdom #KabirDoha #SaiBhakti #SaiBlessings #SaiDevotees #BhaktiYoga #SaiKrishnaji #SaiLeelaRahasya #SaiTeachings #SaiPath #SpiritualJourney #SaiStories #SaiUpdesh …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "4,466 views",
    "Likes": "323"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Disguised monks at Sai Darbar",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mq-s5RIQR2Y",
    "Transcript": "This is no ordinary book; it is luminous advice. Their own autobiography in their own words. Om Sai Ram Today we shall reflect upon one topic: 'Liberation for the garbed renunciate.' The story of the ascetic Vijayanand from the 31st chapter of Sai Satcharit - we have all read it. He set out from Madras. with the desire to undertake the pilgrimage to Manasarovar. He donned the garb of renunciation, but the true essence of renunciation was unknown to him. Such cases are common- many merely wear the ochre robe, while the essence of renunciation eludes them. Outwardly he had adorned the attire of a monk and embarked upon the journey to Manasarovar. This pilgrimage is exceedingly arduous- many who attempt it never return, losing their lives midway. At first, he was filled with zeal, but as soon as the journey begins, he gathers information about Mansarovar from people. They describe the various hardships along the path in detail, and his resolve weakens. He lacked the firmness of resolve. People intimidate him, saying the locals in Bhutan cooperate if you are native, but outsiders face great troubles. Languages change every fifty kilometers or so. Making the path to Mansarovar, extremely tough. \"Where are you heading?\" they ask, shaking him a bit, and the poor soul gets frightened. On his way, he heard the glory of Sai Baba that in Shirdi resided a great Saint of infinite compassion. He decides to seek Baba's darshan instead. Midway, he alights at Manmad and reaches Shirdi. Remember, whether a man is a householder or a renunciate, once a noble resolve is undertaken, it must be pursued with unshakable determination. Even if storms arise, obstacles abound, and hardships multiply, a vow must be honored at any cost. It should not be that a noble sentiment arose, a pure intention emerged in a moment of mood, but later, with some difficulties, it fades away. \"I will complete a saptah parayan\"-three days done, but on the fourth, problems arise, the resolve breaks. Many do this. It should not happen. A resolve is a vow, an austerity. And whenever such holy resolves are made, Maya will surely exert its influence. It will for sure, but one must not give up. Whether storms or tempests come, if the resolve is pure, for spiritual elevation, it must be fulfilled at any cost. This Sanyasi, though clad in the ochre robes, lacked the firmness in resolve.. A little discouragement from people and he wavers, forgetting the journey altogether.. Now, look- many still undertake the Mansarovar pilgrimage. The Kailash Mansarovar journey, from a gross perspective, is physically demanding even in that view. Excellent health is required, utmost fitness, unyielding determination. One must endure whatever physical hardships arise. Expenses must be borne, sleepless nights endured. Only then do you physically reach that lake. That is the gross journey. Now, Mansarovar also holds a spiritual meaning. Always remember, Mansarovar is at a great height, atop the peak. Like the Himalayas, where it is said sages and saints dwell on the summits, or Shiva resides on Kailash. These are all symbols, inner allegories. When our consciousness begins to ascend upward within us, it encounters various obstacles, struggles repeatedly, and reaches the Sahasrara. It is said that upon reaching the Sahasrara, there is a lake of nectar that drips drop by drop into your being, 24 hours a day. And it never ceases. Even if the universe is utterly destroyed, that nectar's taste is eternally savored. Those who attain that supreme state, becoming heirs to bliss. That is the true Mansarovar - the inner one. If you can undertake that long inner journey, that lake's nectar is yours. So, this is the original Mansarovar. When he (Sanyasi Vijayanand) arrives in Shirdi, he enters Baba's court. He spends some time there, witnessing the crowds of people, their devotional fervor toward Baba. He becomes enchanted by Baba, and his mind begins to immerse in Him. After a few days, he receives a telegram. It states that his mother was gravely ill and on her deathbed. Though, the story seems almost unreal, that the person about to go towards Mansarovar, alights midway and reaches Shirdi and he would have written home: \"I did not go to Mansarovar; I am at Sai Baba's court in Shirdi. This is my address.\" It seems fabricated, but the story is worth considering. The narrative in the 31st chapter of Sai Satcharitra states that he receives a telegram: his mother is critically ill. He falls back into attachment to his mother. However, by now, he has sensed that, everyone who comes to Baba's court seeks permission before leaving. He does not depart directly but thinks to ask Baba's consent. He goes to Dwarakamai and requests: \"Baba, a telegram has come - my mother is very ill, counting her final breaths. She must be remembering me every moment.\" \"Perhaps her last breaths are held back because of me. Please grant me permission to leave.\" Baba retorts sharply: \"You have stained this saffron garb. You have blemished the sanctity of the saffron robes. If you were so gripped by attachment and affection, why did you don this attire? Such attachment does not befit those in saffron robes. You should have remained a householder. Why don this garb? Why wear saffron? Why take renunciation?\" As soon as Baba sees him, He discerns: He speaks of his mother's final breaths, but he himself is heading in that direction. His life force could depart anytime. So, Baba instructs: \"Do one thing. Find a secluded spot in the wada(mansion) and recite the Bhagavat for three weeks.\" Baba does not permit him to go and adds: \"There are many thieves in the wada.\" If you read that Chapter attentively. \"There are many thieves in the wada, keep windows and doors closed, and then perform the Bhagavat recitation.\" Now, was he the only one staying in the wada? At that time, it was Sathe Wada, the only place for all devotees coming for Baba's darshan to stay. Did he have his own room? That he will keep all windows and doors closed, and will Baba grant him such permission. Baba simply has to say: \"O disguised one, until now you have given free rein to your senses, but heed my words. For these three weeks, close your senses - the windows and doors. Here, doors mean the mouth and genitals, taste and lust - these are two doors; and sound, touch, and smell - these three windows. Shut them all. Then, immerse yourself in the Bhagavat for three weeks, so that when your life force departs, you remain absorbed in Bhagavat contemplation.\" The man is unaware, but Baba has planned this for him: \"From today onward...\" And if Baba speaks with resolve, He will ensure those three weeks are fulfilled. Since these words issue from His lips, it becomes His resolve: \"I will not let him wander outside; I will restrain his senses from straying; I will turn him inward.\" Definitely, Baba accomplished this. For two weeks, he manages somehow, but in the third week, his body fails him. And around the 17th or 18th day, he departs his mortal coil. Yet, his final breaths must have ceased while immersed in Bhagavat reflection, we must assume so. But the question is about the words said by Baba: \"You have defiled the saffron attire; you have stained its pure hem.\" This is why people, in haste and enthusiasm, commit such acts but later regret profoundly. Kabir Ji says: 'Tan ko jogi sab kare, Man ko kare na koi, Sahaj sab siddhi paeye, Jo man jogi hoye' Clearly, he states: No need to flee the world; stay where you are and strive to make the mind a renunciate. Learn the art of detached enjoyment from Baba, as the maidservant of Kaka Saheb Dixit possessed that skill. 'Tan ko jogi sab kare, Man ko kare na koi, Sahaj sab siddhi paeye, Jo man jogi hoye' In another doha, rebuking false ascetics, Kabir Ji says: \"Becoming a sadhu is arduous, like the date palm tree.\" The date palm is tall; climbing it is immensely difficult. 'Sadhu kahavan kathin hai, Jaise ped khajur, Chadhe toh chakhe prem ras, Gire toh chaknachur' If one climbs up, by mastering the senses, subduing the mind, reaching somehow to the Sahasrara. Then he can taste the nectar of love. That is the soul's essence, the Mansarovar's nectar. He starts drinking it and that nectar drips 24X7. The entire universe may perish, but the dripping ceases not. That is the true nectar. If he ascends then he tastes the nectar of love, but if he falls he is shattered into pieces. Hence, do not toy becoming a sadhu. If you err as a householder, I may forgive you. But after donning the robes, no mercy for mistakes, for seeing your attire, countless souls surrender themselves to you. Thus, your errors become unforgivable. If you fall you are shattered into pieces. If you err while being a householder, perhaps I may forgive you. But if you err while in ochre robes, then you shall be shattered. In yet another doha: 'Prem bhaav ek chahiye, Bhesh aneek bajay' People adopt various forms - shave heads, grow beards, mustaches, don saffron robes. What is needed for? Let unwavering devotion to God settle within; that is required. No need for such attires. One needs singular love-devotion; unwavering bhakti is essential. What need to fashion diverse garbs? And if unwavering devotion descends into the heart, what difference if you dwell at home or in the forest? Whether living as a householder or wandering as a renunciate. But one thing must be common in both, that is unwavering devotion. If unwavering devotion has entered the heart, then even amidst the world, you create an inner forest. You are detached from all, non-attached, capable of detached enjoyment the Lord grants you that state. Then, it matters not if you are a householder among family and society, or have renounced the world. In both cases, you are richly blessed, for the true inner essence, the soul's reality, is in your grasp. That unwavering devotion is attained - what is most vital. If it is absent, if you are not inwardly enriched, then donning external garb of renunciation is futile; remaining a householder is also futile. Inward enrichment is essential. Kabir Ji conveys this through the doha: \"One needs singular love-devotion; unwavering bhakti is crucial.\" That is paramount, and unwavering bhakti means: Besides Your devotion, nothing else appeals to me. Then comes the verse from Naradiya Bhakti Sutra. 'tat prāpya tad evāvalokayati tad eva śṛṇoti tad eva bhāṣayati tad eva cintayati' Wherever I look, I see You, alone. Words from my tongue speak only of You. The mind, if contemplating, contemplates You alone. And if desiring to hear, it yearns only for Your glories. Beyond this, no relish remains in life. If you have attained that state, what difference if at home or in the forest? And if not attained that state, then both are futile. Household life and renunciation both are worthless. For the authentic essence eludes you. But this story: 'Liberation for the garbed renunciate' That means despite his flaws, this ascetic had assumed a showy renunciation. Yet, a Sadguru's compassion showers upon him; despite everything, in his final days, Baba proves supportive, adorning his end. But here is a slight exaggeration, that \"He attains liberation.\" I would not term it 'liberation'; I call it 'Noble progression' Liberation is a profound term. For one who realizes the soul, attains liberation. But sadgati (noble progression) is granted, definitely the next birth will dawn in light, without wandering. Some virtues must have been seen,. One more verse is there in the same chapter, Anyway, he was an ascetic, so the power of worship backed him. Baba engages him in worship: \"For three weeks, listen to the Bhagavat.\" And remember, if Baba declares, \"From today, you will do this,\" He invests His full power to make it happen. Mere words from His lips suffice- \"Krishna, you will do this\" Then we do not act; He compels. Because it is His resolve: \"I will accomplish this.\" Experience it in life - even in dreams, if Baba says, \"You will go there and do this,\" 101%. He ensure that it is done. You do not act; His resolve stands as strength behind you. So, if He told him, \"Stay in the wada and recite Bhagavat for three weeks,\" He would have orchestrated it excellently. No doubt. Mere issuance from His lips, the command fulfills, for it is His resolve. Just as the ascetic Vijayanand lacked seriousness, in his Mansarovar resolve. But a Sadguru's resolve is not like that. If something issues from a Sadguru's lips, it will manifest; He ensures it. So, this was the story of a garbed renunciate Baba touches upon such untouched facets through him, granting us profound illumination. The ascetic Vijayanand then departs his body, and his final rites occur in Shirdi, before Baba Himself. A proverb prevails: Whoever departs their prana before a Sadguru attains liberation. See, in this very chapter, a far superior character appears- Balaram Mankar. He must have attained liberation- 101%, for he had conquered the senses and even subdued the mind. Baba immerses him in deep meditative states, and death follows. Thus, liberation is his right - no doubt. But for the ascetic Vijayanand, 101% if not liberation, Baba certainly granted a noble progression. The next birth will be far better; the journey resumes from where it halted. He will be born with devotion, that is sadgati, the auspicious path. The supreme, pure momentum. I term it sadgati. So, this was the story of the garbed renunciate, Vijayanand. O Mind-Enchanting One, Remover of Curses and Suffering, Destroyer of Ignorance, Bestower of Liberation, The Supreme Giver of Auspiciousness, Embodiment of Truth, Consciousness, and Bliss, the Sacred Mother of countless embodiments of Sai. the True Form of Sai Himself Victory to the Divine Scripture: Shri Sai Satcharita.",
    "Description": "इस वीडियो में कृष्णाजी हमें यह दिव्य सत्य बताते हैं कि अनन्य भक्ति और परमात्मा की प्राप्ति के लिए किसी नकली संन्यासी का वेष धारण करना आवश्यक नहीं है।\n\nसच्चा संन्यास वस्त्रों से नहीं, बल्कि अंतरात्मा की निर्मलता, अहंकार के त्याग और सद्गुरु के चरणों में पूर्ण समर्पण से होता है।\n\nगृहस्थ जीवन में रहकर भी साधक अपने हृदय को साईनाम और प्रेमभाव से भर ले, तो वही उसे परम शांति और परमानंद की अनुभूति कराता है।\n\nश्री साईसच्चरित्र अध्याय ३१ की वेषधारी संन्यासी की कथा के माध्यम से कृष्णाजी यह उजागर करते हैं कि साईबाबा ने बाहरी आडंबर और झूठे वैराग्य को अस्वीकार करते हुए हमें सच्चे मार्ग की ओर चलाया — जहाँ केवल भक्ति, श्रद्धा और प्रेमभाव ही आत्मा को परमात्मा से जोड़ते हैं।\n\nइस प्रवचन में मानसरोवर – आत्मा की दिव्य यात्रा, वेषधारी संन्यासी को साईबाबा का उत्तर, भागवत पारायण का रहस्य और वाडा के बंद दरवाजों का आध्यात्मिक कारण प्रकट होता है।\nसंत कबीर के अमृत दोहे से कृष्णाजी हमें स्मरण कराते हैं कि तन का संन्यास सरल है, पर मन और अहंकार का संन्यास ही वास्तविक तप है। साधु कहलाना कठिन है, क्योंकि इसमें केवल नाम नहीं, बल्कि प्रेम, विनम्रता और आत्मसमर्पण चाहिए।\n\nअंततः यह दिव्य संदेश मिलता है कि जो साधक अपने प्राण सद्गुरु की शरण में अर्पित करता है, उसे निश्चित ही सद्गति और मुक्ति की प्राप्ति होती है।\n\nयह सत्संग हर साधक के हृदय को आह्वान करता है कि बाहरी वेशभूषा और दिखावे को त्यागकर, गृहस्थ जीवन में रहते हुए भी साईबाबा की शरण लेकर हम अनन्य भक्ति, आत्मिक शांति और परम आनंद का अनुभव कर सकते हैं।\n\n🪷🪷🪷\n0:00 Trailer\n1:50 श्रीसाईच्चरित अध्याय ३१ संन्यासी विजयानंद की कहानी\n7:01 मानसरोवर - एक अध्यात्मिक यात्रा\n11:00 वेषधारी संन्यासी को साईका जवाब\n11:51 क्यो बाबाने संन्यासीसे भागवत पारायण करवाया\n13:07 वाडा के खिडीकी दरवाजे बंद क्यू रखे ?\n15:12 संत कबीर दोहा ( तन को जोगी सब करे )\n16:17 संत कबीर दोहा ( साधु कहावन कठीन है )\n18:03 संत कबीर दोहा ( प्रेमभाव एक चाहिए )\n20:11 अनन्य भक्ती मतलब क्या ?\n23:01 शुभसंकल्प साईबाबा भक्तोसे करवाते है!\n25:00 सदगुरूके शरण में प्राण त्यागने वाले को सदगती प्राप्त होती है ।\n🪷🪷🪷\n\nIn this  video, Krishnaji reveals the eternal truth that for attaining unwavering devotion and union with the Divine, one does not need to wear the false attire of a Sannyasi.**\n\nTrue renunciation is not in the robes, but in the purity of the heart, the surrender of the ego, and complete devotion at the feet of the Sadguru.\nEven while living the life of a householder, if one fills the heart with Sai’s name and love, one can experience supreme peace and bliss.\n\nThrough the story of the disguised Sannyasi in Shri Sai Satcharitra (Chapter 31), Krishnaji explains how Sai Baba rejected outer pretensions of renunciation and guided seekers toward the real path — where *faith, love, and surrender* connect the soul to the Supreme.\n\nThis discourse unveils *Mansarovar – the divine inner pilgrimage*, Baba’s profound reply to the disguised monk, the mystery behind the *Bhagwat Parayan*, and the spiritual reason why the doors of the Wada were kept closed.\nThe timeless dohas of Saint Kabir echo through this teaching, Krishnaji reminding us, to renounce the body is easy, but to renounce the ego is the real austerity. To be called a true Sadhu is difficult, for it requires not outer show, but love, humility, and surrender.\n\nUltimately, the message resounds that the one who offers his final breath at the feet of the Sadguru surely attains liberation and eternal peace.\n\n This satsang calls every seeker to rise above external appearances and, even while living as a householder, walk the path of Sai with unwavering devotion, inner surrender, and experience the bliss of union with the Divine. \n\n#SaiBaba #SaiLeelaRahasya #SaiSatcharitra #Krishnaji #SaiBhakti #SaiDarbar #SaiUpdesh #Sadguru #SaiSamarpan #SaiNaamSmaran #SaiDevotion #SaiTeachings #SaiBlessings #SaiSpirituality #KabirDoha #SaiSatcharitraAdhyay31 #AnanyaBhakti #SaiBhakta #SaiMandir #SaiAnubhav …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saibaba, sanatani, Sanyasi, grahast, krishnaji, Krishnaji  Mumbai wale, Saibaba Shirdi, Sai bhakti, Krishnaji, Saileela Rahasy, Veshdhari Sanyasi, Bhakti, Sathe wada",
    "Views": "2,630 views",
    "Likes": "276"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई से बढ़कर सद्गुरू कौन ! - By Krishnaji",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wSaVdS67CKc",
    "Transcript": "This is no ordinary book; it is luminous advice. Their own autobiography in their own words. Om Sai Ram 'Who could be a greater Sadguru than Sai?' While everyone proclaims, Sai Baba as \"Sadguru\" 'Sachchidanand Sadguru Sainath Maharaj ki Jai' But, in reality, only a rare few among millions truly bestow upon Baba the exalted status of Sadguru. They can be counted on the fingers. Because the privilege to call Baba our Sadguru is granted only when His heart unfolds before us, when we truly comprehend His divine will. The moment we are permitted entry into His sacred heart, He becomes our authentic Sadguru, and we transform into His devoted disciples. Until that access to His heart is attained, until His intentions are fully grasped, He remains not our Sadguru; we are neither true devotees nor genuine disciples We merely utter hollow praises: 'Sachchidanand Sadguru Sainath Maharaj ki Jai.' Yet, we fail to grasp it's profound essence. It is vital to understand His heart, to sense the deep longing within it, to discern His sacred will. Otherwise, an immense divide persists. We just declare verbally that He is Sachchidanand Sadguru, but to be completely forthright, He has not yet become our Sadguru. Mere utterance is one matter; genuine inner resonance is another. Countless, millions chant the slogan: 'Sachchidanand Sadguru Sainath Maharaj ki Jai.' But in truth, is He truly our Sadguru? To be very honest, He is merely a nomadic seeker. For we pursue devotion according to our own desires, without any inclination to understand His will. As long as we engage in worship driven by our personal whims, He remains a wanderer, not a Sadguru. Consider chapter thirty-two - without it, Guru Purnima remains incomplete. Baba narrates: I, accompanied by three fellow aspirants, ventured forth in pursuit of Brahma Jnana. Though, that this is a profound allegory Why would Baba, the very embodiment of Parabrahma, need to seek Brahma Jnana? Nevertheless, to enlighten us, He often descends to our humble level, crafting parables to illuminate our path. Thus, Baba recounts: I set out on the quest for Brahma Jnana, accompanied by my three companions. We sought to achieve it solely through our own prowess. We were steeped in conceit, convinced that we required no guidance. We had delved into the scriptures on our own terms. One extolled karma as supreme, another yoga, yet another pure knowledge. But Baba discerned otherwise: Bookish wisdom alone yields no fruit without an enlightened Guru, at whose lotus feet we offer total surrender. Only then can He unveil the authentic nature of Brahma Jnana. Hence, Baba yearned for such a Guru to whom He could fully surrender, while the other three roamed aimlessly, armed only with textual erudition. They wandered relentlessly into a forest - so impenetrable, confined, and enveloped in thick vegetation that not even a single beam of sunlight could pierce through. This forest represents the cosmos itself, this worldly realm, where even a solitary ray from the Sadguru's heart eludes us. We, too, are adrift in this dense forest, untouched by the Sadguru's radiant grace. At last, mercy awakens in a nomad. Witnessing the four lost souls, the nomad inquires: Where are you bound? The three companions deem it irrelevant: What concern is our profound quest to this nomad? He lacks a stable home, drifting from place to place - why disclose to him? They brush aside the query, affording him no reverence. They declare: \"We embark on such a lofty pursuit; what could this nomad comprehend of Brahma Jnana? He is a restless wanderer of forests, unsteady - why reveal our intent?\" They withhold the truth, depart, and resume their wandering. Yet, they circle endlessly, like one trapped in a loop, inevitably returning to the origin. Those who tread the spiritual path without a Guru exert tremendous effort- they toil, perspire, struggle, and immerse themselves fully - yet their journey doesn't progress. Baba illustrates this as meandering within the forest, in circles: Despite exhaustive labor, they arrive back at the starting point. The nomad remains steadfast and advises: Has discernment now arisen? The trail you follow is so constricted, riddled with deceptions, illusions- this maya-laden world, akin to an impenetrable thicket. Without a pathfinder as companion, the voyage is unattainable. Accept my counsel now. Behold, the sun scorches overhead; I possess scant provisions - a simple dry bread and chutney. Partake of a few morsels and continue onward. The three companions, Baba's fellow seekers, grow even more indignant: Not only does the path evade us, but this nomad persistently obstructs, afflicting us in novel ways. Yet, his entreaty flows from pure, selfless affection: Surely hunger and thirst assail you - accept the humble sustenance I offer, quench your thirst with my water. Still, the three refuse and depart. Baba ponders: What ulterior motive could this soul harbor toward me, that he perceives my hunger, my thirst, and tenderly offers his own provisions with love? Where selfless love cascades freely, where an individual bestows affection without any expectation, that verily is the sanctuary of the Guru. Baba humbly prostrates before the nomad. The nomad presents a quarter portion of the bread - regarded as one-fourth - and Baba accepts it. This quarter symbolizes: The aspirant's yearning for Brahma Jnana is so profound that all worldly allurements and sensual pursuits equate to mere fragments, like a quarter bread. One dwells in the material realm only nominally, with complete orientation toward the divine. Consuming a quarter bread signifies: This soul eats solely to sustain life, not living merely to indulge in eating. He partakes of the quarter bread and sips the water. The parable unfolds: Behold the metaphor, the exquisite craftsmanship of Sai Satcharitra! No sooner does He honor the nomad's guidance, consume the quarter bread, and drink the water, than the Gurudev reveals Himself. What a sublime allegory, what a masterful conveyance! The Gurudev manifests. In the narrative, at the chapter's inception, they affirm: We possess no Guru; we venture to attain Brahma Jnana through our own might. Evidently, all four, Baba included, aspired to realize it independently. Yet abruptly, the Guru appears - not in imaginings, not in visions, unbound to any form. How so? The tale articulates plainly: While they disregarded the nomad's counsel, he remained a mere nomad; but the instant his will was enshrined upon their crowns, the nomad transcended into the Guru. The individual unaltered, the appearance unchanged, the essence immutable- yet the disciple's heart undergoes metamorphosis. From an ordinary wayfarer to a sanctified disciple, for he begins to intuit the Sadguru's will and dissolves his own into it, offering complete oblation. In that sacred juncture, the ordinary devotee elevates to a true disciple; thus, the nomad ascends to Sadguru, and the humble seeker becomes the illumined one. Because, he understands His will, and everything was surrendered in accordance with that will. In this era, multitudes flock to Shirdi's Samadhi Mandir for Baba's divine darshan. For 99.999% of them, Sai Baba is not the Sadguru but a mere nomad. I utter a harsh verity: For 99.999%, Sai Baba is a nomad, not the Sadguru. Those who truly know Baba's heart, who feel the profound yearning pulsating within it, who perceive His divine intent - and harbor the fortitude to reshape themselves in harmony with it, no matter the tribulation - resolve: From this day forth, even if I must vanquish my ego at every breath, subdue my desires moment by moment, I shall align with Your will. The instant such capability dawns in the soul, that very moment the individual becomes a true disciple, and Baba, who until then appeared as a nomad, reveals Himself as the Sadguru, the Sovereign of the Cosmos. This is a profoundly layered parable, and Guru Purnima attains fulfillment only through immersing in the depths of chapter thirty-two. We are all familiar with this narrative, and even if I were to expound upon it until my final breath, it would still seem insufficient. It imparts timeless wisdom. Whenever we enter the Samadhi Mandir, may the illumination from this satsang inspire introspection: In truth, is Baba a mere nomad to me, or my Sadguru? If His will is unveiling itself, if the longing of His heart resonates within me, then undoubtedly He is the Sadguru; otherwise, a profound chasm endures between us - a barrier in communication. It is akin to a South Indian conversing with a Chinese counterpart: Each speaks in their native language, dialogue ensues, yet mutual understanding eludes them entirely. They could converse lifelong without comprehension. Such is our connection with Baba Neither does the language of the world penetrate His realm, nor does His divine expression reach us. Consequently, Baba is compelled to declare: \"I dwell in none of them.\" Chapter 25 Until our hearts converge as one, how can the principle of non-duality be established? Vedanta expounds the supreme non-duality: I am the Absolute Whole. Without the Sadguru's heart revealing itself, such realization remains unattainable. It's impossible. To forge the sacred bond between Guru and disciple, it is indispensable to fathom the Sadguru's will. Absent that, Sai Baba lingers as a nomad. Presenting such unyielding truths, such poignant realities, often offends many - they withdraw from us. Indeed, countless individuals, invoking Baba's name, proclaim: It is through you that we offer prayers to Baba; we intercede with Baba for your afflictions. They deliver uplifting discourses and produce videos incessantly, asserting: Today, Baba has instructed me to convey this to you; this is Baba's directive that I share. Baba discloses everything to them - save the profound depths of Sai Satcharitra. While He claims: I am the very essence of Sai Satcharitra; beyond that, all else is revealed. Hence, I reiterate: Baba's spiritual profundity must illuminate the world; otherwise, this charade perpetuates. Until the genuine currency circulates, counterfeit coins dominate the market. Someone must hoist this banner. I recognize the immense adversity involved - the profound trials one must endure. Having embraced this mission today, I am acutely aware of the multifaceted pressures that arise. Yet, truth remains truth - it must be proclaimed. Though it may irk many eyes, it demands expression; how else shall clarity dawn? Baba affirms: I have woven the entire profundity of Vedanta into Sai Satcharitra. If Vedanta upholds non-duality - 'O living soul, you are Shiva; O individual self, you are the Supreme- Sai Satcharitra, through its windings and turns, guides us to that zenith. Sai Satcharitra imparts that exalted truth, yet we crave no such elevation. We seek fleeting remedies. First and foremost, a profound chasm exists between a saint and a Sadguru- a distinction the world may never fully embrace; I know not when. Between an ordinary saint and a Sadguru spans the expanse of earth to heaven, a stark reality the world may long resist. For the world attains only the vantage of a common saint, comprehends only a saint's depths- but a Sadguru soars immeasurably higher. Thus, myriad questions emerge. Behold Kabir's doha, how it clarifies with crystalline precision: 'Teerath gaye te ek phal, Sant mile phal chaar,' 'Sadguru mile anant phal, Kahat Kabir vichaar' Kabir elucidates unequivocally: The Sadguru confers boundless blessings, a realm far, transcending saints. A saint, having experientially realized the soul, can attest: I traversed this path to attain that realization; if you follow likewise, you too may arrive. Such clarity he imparts, provided he himself has attained soul-realization. The minimal requisite for sainthood is, the direct experience of the soul. I am not this body, I am the eternal self; this illumination, coupled with a purified consciousness. If these attributes reside within, that soul is a saint. Yet, as Kabir proclaims: Sadguru yields infinite fruits, reflects Kabir. The Sadguru is He who has encompassed the entire creation within Himself, who permeates every atom - omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent. A saint transcends maya; a Sadguru subjugates it, wielding it under His command. I delineate the distinction: A saint is one whom maya, in mercy, releases- vowing henceforth to ensnare him no more. But He who conquers maya, mastering it utterly - that is the Sadguru. Until this is internalized, inquiries will persist. Kabir voiced a doha, and those attuned to saints - whose reach extended to saintly hearts but faltered at the Sadguru's essence - grew resentful toward Saint Kabir. The provocation? He declared: 'Sur nar muni jan devata, Brahma vishnu mahesh,' 'Uncha mahal Kabir ka, par na paave shesh.' These celestial beings, mortals, sages, deities - Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesh - diminished, while Kabir asserts: My palace towers beyond all, inaccessible even to Shesha. This is the utterance of a Sadguru. Such profound declarations elude ordinary grasp. They branded Kabir egotistical, yet he had ascended to that sublime state- mere mortals could not perceive it. Kabir's palace towers; Shesha finds no passage - that is the Sadguru's exalted domain, vastly surpassing sainthood. We can apprehend saints, their dispassion, devotion, wisdom, inner purity resonate with our souls. But a Sadguru's demeanor is so extraordinary that our intellect falters, transcending its boundaries. Hence, doubts proliferate. Nonetheless, Sai Baba is the Sadguru, not a mere saint. Returning to the core theme: Sai as the quintessential Sadguru. 'What are the hallmarks of a Sadguru?' From Sai Satcharitra, chapter forty-eight. [Marathi Verse] A seeker inquires whether Sai Baba is an ordinary Guru or the Sadguru. Ensuing qualities unfold. Therein, it is stated: One proficient in studying the Vedas, masterful in the four Vedas or the six Shastras- The six Shastras encompass: Nyaya, the art of logical reasoning to discern truths; Vaisheshika, profound inquiry into the material universe as atomic essence; Sankhya, the science of self-realization - as exemplified in the Bhagavad Gita's second chapter, Sankhya Yoga, overflowing with soul-wisdom; if its approximately seventy-two verses truly permeate the heart, the remaining eighteen chapters become superfluous; Then, Yoga, mastery over the mind; Mimamsa, elucidation of ritualistic actions and their fruits - performing such karma yields corresponding outcomes; and Vedanta, the distilled nectar of the Vedas, embodying the Upanishad's depths, focused exclusively on the soul, the Supreme, and Omkar - self-knowledge and ultimate reality. Nyaya, Vaisheshika, Sankhya, Yoga, Mimamsa, Vedanta- These are the six Shastras One who imparts this scriptural wisdom verbally is not deemed Sadguru. Even one who elucidates Vedanta through intellectual grasp, devoid of personal realization- wise ones do not call him Sadguru. [Marathi Verse] Some cultivate pranayama, retaining breath for hours, wise ones do not call him Sadguru. Others endure scorching seals upon their forms - imprinting heated copper emblems as austerity, a debased practice of that age - knowledgeable souls deny them as Sadguru. Those who used to endure scorching seals. Those reciting verses on Brahman, bestowing transient delights, enlightened ones do not recognize them as Sadguru. [Marathi Verse] Initiators who bestow scriptural mantras like 'Om Namah Shivaya', prescribing japa methods, yet ignorant of fruition's timeline - neither master nor disciple knows; such illusions enlightened ones call them not even Guru. [Marathi Verse] One who discourses on ultimate truth with eloquent fluency, yet whose verbal wisdom lacks assurance faltering, uncertain, bereft of experiential depth even in the slightest, mere superficial oration, akin to a barren drought in realization and experience. Verbal husk alone. It is just verbal husk, devoid of experience. [Marathi Verse] Here, it is unequivocally clarified: To embody Sadguru, two attributes are essential, comprehensive mastery of scriptures and Vedanta, capable of resolving any query instantaneously, even at midnight; versed in every sacred text. Complete knowledge and profound lived experience. Solely He who excels in both, is a Sadguru and holds the authority to awaken disciples. So, these two qualities must be present, A consummate verbal scholar, enriched by experiential wisdom, not mere rhetoric, but embodied truth. Command over the six Shastras, Vedanta in totality, graced by Saraswati for eloquent expression, and empowered to transmit direct experience. Such a one clasps the hand, guiding with resolute force along the path - that potency defines Sadguru. A saint merely indicates: I attained this pinnacle via this route; traverse it thus, and you may reach my station. But the Sadguru seizes the collar, propelling forward, an abyss of difference. This is the fundamental distinction. [Marathi Verse] What lines, these verses stirred the spiritual realm It does not happen that way; in reality, the truth is something else. For reality diverges; Baba articulates otherwise. One lacking personal realization - what enlightenment can he confer upon disciples? To bestow ten rupees, one must first possess them. He remains destitute; how can he enrich others? Devoid of experience, barren of that inner unveiling - what will I offer to the world? What will such a person give to his devotees, He himself is destitute, how will he enrich others? Furthermore: Sans the direct realization of 'I alone pervade the entire cosmos'- how can He elevate devotees to that sublime state? One imparts only what one holds; if he doesn't have it, from where will he give. Observe this verse. [Marathi Verse] No service is sought from disciples, not even in dreams. be it physical, mental, financial, adulation, or acclaim. If accepted, purely for the recipient's upliftment. Baba drew funds compellingly, yet solely for devotees' spiritual welfare, channeling them aptly - never for personal need. It is clearly written, No anticipations from disciples, not even in reverie financial aid, bodily labor, intellectual service, flattery. Worship, hymns, not even in slumber does He crave such. Conversely, the Sadguru, in return, consecrates His entirety to the disciples - body, mind, wealth. When exigency demands, He sacrifices His very life to consummate their existence, as Baba did for Tatya Patil. That is Sadguru. These hallmarks must course through our being like vital essence upon invoking 'Sadguru' These verses should flow through our bloodstreams- it is the definition of Sadguru. Unequivocally it is said: No service anticipated from disciples, not in dreams - not even commendation. Instead: How may I dissolve myself for the disciple's sake? How merge day into night in their service? He is the Sadguru [Marathi Verse] A Sadguru is the one who harbours no such ego as, \"The disciple is insignificant, ignorant, and foolish, and I am the pinnacle of wisdom.\" Rather: This being is as perfect as I am; veiled only by illusion. Should I lift that shroud, we are unified. One with such luminous insight, and the capacity to bestow it - that is Sadguru. Never, even fleetingly, viewing the disciple as inferior, ignorant, debased, fallen- such contemptuous notions absent from His consciousness. Instead, discerning the Absolute Brahman in every entity, igniting rays of hope: With proper guidance, this soul shall awaken. Extending unwavering trust to disciples, dispelling maya's veil - they too are as whole as I am. The one with such clarity is the Sadguru. [Marathi Verse] Thus perceiving, He nurtures paternal affection toward disciples - No, I affirm, billions-fold intensified. Expecting no sustenance from them, not even in dreams - for His upkeep, no aid solicited. Such a Sadguru is the zenith of excellence in the universe. When do these virtues manifest? Contemplate: If the disciple embodies selfless service, Nishkama Karma Yoga- performing every deed with detachment and purity - then, upon attaining Sadguru-hood, these qualities arise innately. For the seed of selflessness is planted during discipleship. So, when he becomes the Sadguru he will behold this level. Hence, I emphasize repeatedly: Nishkama Karma Yoga, propels spiritual ascent with meteoric velocity Absent this seed in the disciple, whence in the Sadguru? The same essence evolves into Sadguru; if the odyssey is rooted in selfless action, only such sublime Sadguru emerges - lesser is inconceivable. It's impossible. [Marathi Verse] The Sadguru, supreme in creation, exalted across the cosmos. Among myriad Sadgurus, this one reigns preeminent. Yet, for such attributes to bloom: As disciple - prior to Sadguru attainment the aspirant must recognize the universe as the Guru's expansive manifestation. Revering every footfall, serving all beings as His cosmic form. If sadhana is imbued with such sanctity, then upon becoming Sadguru, this exalted stature is attained. Because, A neem seed yields a neem tree, not mango. Similarly, if selfless karma was embodied in discipleship, sublime Sadguru results - otherwise, unattainable. Yes, one concluding verse: [Marathi Verse] He whose heart eternally abides in supreme tranquility, untainted by pride in erudition, wisdom, or realization. Regarding even the humblest creature with enduring hope: \"This too is as perfect as I am, merely ensnared in maya's web; if I liberate it, equality prevails\" The one who perpetually indwells such sentiments- is the Sadguru. Hemadpant declares: These principal traits of the Sadguru, which profoundly touched my soul, I placed before you - from chapter forty-eight, verses one to fourteen. Extraordinary verses that elegantly define Sadguru. What occasion surpasses Guru Purnima for absorbing these sacred utterances? There is a vast gulf between an ordinary saint and a Sadguru. We are immensely blessed to have encountered such a Sadguru. The regrettable irony: We prove unworthy of being a true disciple. We evade comprehending His will, dissipating our entire existence in superficial, fake emotions. Merely marking presence: Baba, I have arrived What now? It is but fervent impulse, blind enthusiasm. If the yearning of His heart evades our grasp, we remain leagues apart. I invoke Baba ceaselessly, yet eons distant from Him. Behold the poignant paradox: A lifetime devoted to chanting Baba, yet eternally separated. Baba laments: I expended My utmost to unveil My will, yet you never attuned to it, persisting in your self-willed devotion. It is acceptable, not erroneous - but neither is it authentic. If true devotion exists, it demands perceiving My will. Every verse in Sai Satcharitra embodies My intent, affirms Baba. Until you immerse in it with that reverence, enshrine it in your heart, and evolve accordingly- you shall not attain Me. An immense void will endure between us perpetually. Now, additional hallmarks of the Sadguru, gleaned from various chapters of Sai Satcharitra- I have curated a few to elucidate further. I'll take some verses, to provide the clarity on 'What is the yearning of a Sadguru?' Chapter 13, Verse 73 [Marathi Verse] Recently, we had released a short on this. Immersed ceaselessly in tribulations, submerged neck-deep in the ocean of immense sorrow. Whosoever ascends the steps of Dwarakamai shall assuredly ascend the throne of eternal bliss. He yearns to bestow upon us the ultimate wisdom, yet first seeks to extricate us from prolonged agonies, to elevate us from abysmal suffering. Where else might one find such a compassionate Sadguru? For He knows: However profound the Vedanta I aspire to infuse, it is presently unfeasible- this soul is mired in afflictions, ensnared by maya's grip. First, I must liberate it from those chains, alleviate its worldly burdens. Only then can I, pour forth Vedanta's depths. Who embodies greater Sadguru than He who harbors such tender mercy? Another verse from chapter ten, number fifty-eight: [Marathi Verse] Beholding His disciples entangled in worldly fetters, His heart overflows with profound compassion, When shall this one transcend corporeality? How shall I guide it beyond bodily identification? When shall I acquaint it with its true essence? This concern engrosses Him day and night. Such is the hallmark of the Sadguru. He resides not to gratify mundane cravings - initially, He may offer enticements like sweets, yet not eternally. If He dispenses confections lifelong, He cannot be the Sadguru. Clarify this first. If He fulfills every whim, legitimate or otherwise - every demand - He forfeits Sadguru stature. Then it's maya. But even maya refrains; sometimes granting, sometimes withholding - thus entrapping. Then how could the Sadguru do so? At times Maya bestows happiness and at times sorrow. If Maya doesn't grant all your wishes then how will Sadguru? It's impossible Observing the disciple ensnared in earthly bonds - familial ties, lustful impulses, vices, sensory indulgences- His heart dissolves in anguish. We languish in ignorance; Baba endures the torment. This is the hallmark of Sadguru. We languish in ignorance; Baba endures the torment. Another verse, perhaps from chapter twelve: As butter liquefies in flame's warmth, But Sadguru is that butter who melts not from personal trials, but from witnessing others' plight. Such a declaration emerges. Here, we wallow in ignorance, cloaked in desires, perishing amid vices, shackled by worldly attachments- yet Baba suffers. 'Immersed in contemplation for His devotees' welfare' When shall liberation dawn for them? When moksha? When shall they too experience My wholeness? Twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, absorbed in this vigil. What greater attribute for a Sadguru? Blessed with such an unparalleled paragon, the crown jewel among saints and Gurus- yet if salvation eludes us in Sai Baba's presence, no soul in the universe is more ill-fated. A third verse from chapter five, number nineteen-three: [Marathi Verse] Our inner arrogance, all latent desires, diverse inclinations - unique to each soul. No two minds mirror identical dispositions; some tendencies predominate in one, others in another. Baba declares: Transforming those manifold inclinations into sacrificial offerings, like kindling for the blaze. [Marathi Verse] Worldly propensities as complete holocaust, ignited with discerning application. 'Yukti prayukti' - such masterful terminology. Not every transformation is feasible at once; gauging the moment: Presently, this much can be purged from within. Seizing the opportune context: Now, I can enact this divine play; now, administer this measure of refinement. The ego has reached a nadir - I may intensify the rigor. Or, excess severity now might cause flight. Such acuity: Yukti prayukti, an exquisite expression. Even in kindling, He employs profound artistry administering precisely the treatment sustainable, lest excess prompts abandonment. How much heat can be endured? Precisely that - neither excessive nor deficient. 'Yukti prayukti.' Why Sadguru ceaselessly endeavors 24x7 on our behalf? What will He attain? We can only envision In the vast cosmos, if a Sadguru exists, He must embody such boundless compassion. [Marathi Verse] If a mother were to rebuke her child, casting it aside with disdain; if the ocean repudiated the rivers, returning them whence they came - though both are impossibilities. A mother could never spurn her offspring, nor the ocean reject its tributaries. Yet, if such improbabilities occurred, only then could I distance Myself from you, only then inflict harm upon you. Explicitly: Your transgressions are not so grievous that My blessings cannot encompass them. You are incapable of committing sins beyond the reach of My grace. However vast your faults, My compassion surpasses them infinitely. Through this verse, Baba reassures us: Your transgressions are not so grievous that My blessings cannot encompass them. You cannot arrive at a realm where My mercy falters. No such domain has been fashioned by the Divine. Wherever you stray, even in the gravest iniquity, My compassion shall manifest. If a mother spurns her child, if the ocean repels the rivers - then alone shall I forsake you, then alone cause you detriment. As those dual impossibilities cannot transpire, so too am I incapable of abandoning you. No matter the magnitude of your sins, in My sanctuary - forgiveness awaits, and embrace you, renewed faith: This soul shall redeem itself. Indirectly conveyed. Such attributes: Overflowing with mercy, meriting the Sadguru mantle. Another verse: [Marathi verse] Baba, in His embodied form, addressed devotees prior to departing the physical realm. Harbor no anxiety that one day I shall vanish from your midst, departing this world - entertain no such notion. My corporeal frame may dissolve, though My body perishes, My eternal spirit shall forever remain vigilant for your welfare. Beyond that: My bones, even if interred and merged with the earth, If My body perishes, My soul will not, I am an the eternal soul. I manifested in this body on my will, and will leave it in the same way. but My true form is present now and will be present even after. It will not perish. My bones, even if interred and merged with the earth, shall lament, yearn, and immerse in your concerns. Not merely I - My very bones shall articulate words for your upliftment, emanating from the samadhi. A deeply resonant verse, unveiling the Sadguru's profound yearning toward devotees, our well-being consumes Him. If we disregard these truths, persisting in arbitrary devotion- then our souls never united nor will they ever. So, these verses explain the yearning of a Sadguru for His devotees and their welfare. He exists not solely to satiate desires, the world regards Baba as an emergency rescuer. Afflictions strike, hasten to Shirdi. As if He idles otherwise, poised to fulfill every justified or unjust plea - predominantly the latter, frivolous. If genuine, perhaps mercy grants; unjust - how possibly? Should He concede the unjust, He ceases to be Sadguru. For that instance leave Sadguru. Consider a child afflicted with gastric infection - taken to the physician. The doctor admonishes the parents foremost: You indulged endless chocolates. He is a small kid anaware of what to eat and what not. He demanded for it and you gave him, now an infection is ensued. Now medications and austere diet for six months is required to restore his health. After that, Awakened parents, if the child demands chocolate, respond with firm denial - perhaps a gentle rebuke. If an ordinary parent discerns what to grant or withhold. Would the Sadguru not know? Will He fulfill all our wishes? A common guardian recognizes excess imperils life, Then for a Sadguru it is impossible to fulfill every unjust entreaty. If truly essential, perhaps conceded - but He foresees: This fulfillment ignites further cravings. Sadguru comprehends: One desire unchecked spawns a cascade - next visit bears an extended ledger. Now, He has to work on it too. One desire unchecked spawns a cascade - next visit bears an extended ledger. Yet, He also perceives: Denial precludes approach to My threshold, hearing My words, attuning to My heart's rhythm. Thus, compelled, He descends to our plane initially, granting few wishes to draw us near, place Sai Satcharitra in hand, cultivate receptivity. Gradually, insight emerges: Baba fulfills not every baseless plea. Maturity blossoms - or one lingers infantile at eighty. Some remain perpetual children - abundant indeed. Explicitly: Anxiety not that I depart; body absent henceforth in tangible form. Inter Me - My bones shall melt for you, eternally anxious for your sake. As I labored in embodiment, an even deeper pledge. What could describe Sadguru better than this? Such yearning selfless - what recompense? We proffer naught. He is laboring to uplift us to the state of the Supreme, What could we give Him in return? Nothing Mere alignment with His command contents Him. The dilemma: We shun His intent. Devotion per our caprice, exalted as paramount. Each harbors personal whims - for 'Jaya mani jaisa bhava' evokes billions of sentiments. Comforting - sacrifice naught, persist unchanged. But utter 'Your will, not mine' - all must yield; terror ensues. That verse soothes: Per my sentiment, Baba conforms - myriad manifestations. Yet His will is singular, not legion. Seize that one. Dispositions vary - billions emerge. Rudimentary: Undoubtedly, He responds per sentiments - initially, fostering faith. His compulsion. But not the ultimate verity. A provisional utterance, born of necessity: 'Jaya mani jaisa bhava taya taisa anubhav.' Descending to our stature. Yoga scriptures delineate seven chakras: From Muladhara to Sahasrara. My abode: Muladhara - incapable of ascent. From there: Per sentiment, the experience. Reluctant to elevate. In compassion: Very well, from Sahasrara I descend to Muladhara, uniting with you. Communion occurs - but imperfect; He stoops. If the Sadguru decrees: I shift not an iota; exert righteous effort, ascend to Me- But is it complete. He had to come down to my level. But if He asks, to do purusharth and refuses to come down. And reach the level where I am but I'll be in your support. Attuning to His heart, discerning His will - full purushartha deployed, ascending: Sovereign of existence. Discern the disparity. Clutching collar, dragging downward - invoking 'Jaya mani...' Yet hauling Him from heights to our depths. My assertion: Comprehend His will - He immovable at the apex; we must climb via endeavor. Tribulations abound, torments, dissolution - earth to heaven variance. This encapsulates His torment for us. Only a Sadguru can do such things. the supreme Sadguru's - boundless yearning for our salvation, beyond mortal capacity. After such profound yearning, He seeks reciprocity: I torment thus for you, perishing in your cause grant Me one solemn vow: Chapter twenty-five, verse one hundred eight. [Marathi Verse] Through the previous verses, the yearning of the Sadguru is clear. But after so much of efforts put in, He too expects one thing, Simply remember Me, enshrine Me in your consciousness, forget Me not. This is what Baba wants. Remember Me with unwavering faith and love. Not superficially As in chapter three it is mentioned: A covetous soul buries amassed wealth covertly. Wherever he roams, his mind fixates there - supreme avarice. Likewise, amid worldly engagements, if attention centers on Me: The work is accomplished. Baba affirms: With that intensity of love - fulfilling all duties: Office with integrity, household with fidelity. Subordinate self-interest, elevate kin's welfare - comfort, affection, honor. Master these fundamentals, and triumph ensues. Amidst, let Me not fade from remembrance even momentarily. [Marathi Verse] Devotion selfless - stipulation Nishkam, devoid of worldly yearnings, even in reverie. Shame Me not with petitions; necessities I discern unaided. An innocent infant clasps the mother's hem without voicing hunger; she intuits. The paramount Sadguru - why articulate needs? He perceives all. Baba inquires: Why demean with demands? If a guileless child vocalizes to the mother, it shames her. Similarly, in the Sadguru's court: My wish this-dishonors Him. Essentials - bestowed unsolicited. I reiterate: Essentials - unsolicited. No need to shame Him by asking for it. [Marathi Verse] Explicitly: Nishkam bhakti ensures supreme welfare. If it is whole-heartedly. The world exploits Baba as a mere stepping stone: Ascend His chest to grasp ephemeral illusions. Eternal as ladder, trampled for transient gains. 99.99% adherents thus: Baba the means, not the end. Ascend His chest, making Him the stepping stone. Crush Him under our foot. And then crave for some illusion. Baba as a mere stepping stone for us, not the destination. Inverse required: Trample illusion, attain the Eternal. Correct opposite Baba the everlasting - crushed underfoot for fleeting pursuits. Agony when conceding: He knows infusion of venomous desires. Look at it from His perspective. Whenever, He grants us petty wish, how much suffering He takes up. Because we are not awaken, but He is. How much pain and suffering He faces. From His vantage: Granting this petty wish - later neutralize its toxin. Labor doubled. The disciple abstaining from demands: How He rejoices - burden lightened. Envision. His yearning: Bestow transcendence, labors immense - limitless. Ours: Eradicate ignorance ceaselessly, elevate to divinity. Effort boundless, compassion infinite. In exchange: Selfless adoration—relinquish pleas; I oversee. I fathom your toxins, how to purge vices, ego, propensities, attachments. My odyssey spans eons - yet masterful. From you: Merely this entreaty - selfless devotion; I manage the rest. Kabir Ji has couplet on selfless devotion, with which we should end this topic. Kabir Ji says, 'Phal kaaran seva kare, Kare na man se kaam, Kahe Kabir sevak nahi, Jo mange chau guna daam' He is not a servant who demands something in recompense As Baba says in Chapter 39, on a Shloka. Serve the Sadguru, then earn the right to question. Service thus: This form bestowed solely for Sadguru's ministry - no alternate obligation. Not capricious: Serve when inclined, vanish for years. My essence exists for Thy service. With such sanctity, serve sans fruit - verily service. 'Phal kaaran seva kare, Kare na man se kaam, Kahe Kabir sevak nahi, Jo mange chau guna daam' But those who demand for something in return, Serve a little and then give orders. Just the way of given order is different. They say, 'Please..' But it is an order. The way of saying is very gentle. We are humans so we know how to trick. 'Phal kaaran seva kare, Kare na man se kaam, Kahe Kabir sevak nahi, Jo mange chau guna daam' In another Kabir Ji says, 'Bhaj dina kahu aur hi, Tan sadhu ke sang' Invocation another's - body with sages, yet mind on cravings. But the body is set for Sadguru's service. 'Bhaj dina kahu aur hi, Tan sadhu ke sang, Kahe Kabir kaari gazi, Kaise laage rang' Black garb from crown to sole: Devours colors. Blackened weave - how imbibe tint? If you put any color it will not catch that color. 'Kahe Kabir kaari gazi, Kaise laage rang' The body is engaged into the service of the Sadguru but during the service, mind is engrossed in desires. So, such a person is like a black cloth, even if the Sadguru wishes to imbibe the colors of His love, knowledge and endless devotion, He won't success. Because selfishness has taken the form of black cloth, it won't take up any dye. Attire must be pristine - selfless devotion. Then, suffused in saffron renunciation. Bring the saffron, Chapter 12. For dyeing: Purity essential. He colors as willed. Black-robed in court: He, despite yearning, cannot infuse - helpless. Thus concludes today's discourse: 'Who could be a greater Sadguru than Sai?' O Mind-Enchanting One, Remover of Curses and Suffering, Destroyer of Ignorance, Bestower of Liberation, The Supreme Giver of Auspiciousness, Embodiment of Truth, Consciousness, and Bliss, the Sacred Mother of countless embodiments of Sai. the True Form of Sai Himself Victory to the Divine Scripture: Shri Sai Satcharita.",
    "Description": "इस वीडियो में कृष्णाजी बताते हैं कि साई से बढ़कर सद्गुरु कौन है और सद्गुरु का वास्तविक स्वरूप क्या है। एक संत वह है जो माया से मुक्त हो चुका है, किंतु सद्गुरु वह है जो माया पर विजय प्राप्त कर चुका है। सद्गुरु वही है जो शिष्य को न केवल सांसारिक बंधनों से मुक्त करता है बल्कि उसे आत्मिक उन्नति के मार्ग पर भी ले जाता है।\n\nसाई बाबा को सद्गुरु कहने का अधिकार हमें तभी मिलता है जब हम उनके हृदय में प्रवेश पा लें, उनकी मर्ज़ी को समझ सकें और उनके अनुग्रह का अनुभव करें। जब तक यह नहीं होता, तब तक न हम सच्चे शिष्य हैं, न सच्चे भक्त—सिर्फ नाम लेने से भक्ति पूर्ण नहीं होती।\n\nइस दिव्य विडिओ में साईसच्चरित्र की पावन लीलाओं और कबीर के दोहों के माध्यम से यह गहन सत्य प्रकट होता है कि केवल एक परम सद्गुरु ही अपने शिष्य के उद्धार के लिए इतनी तड़प सकता है। साधारण इंसान के बस की बात नहीं कि वह किसी की आत्मा को मोक्ष तक पहुँचा सके।\n\nयदि बाबा के सान्निध्य में रहकर भी हमारा उद्धार नहीं हो पाया, तो हमसे बड़ा दुर्भाग्यशाली इस ब्रह्मांड में कोई नहीं।\n\nसच्चिदानंद सद्गुरु साईनाथ महाराज की जय!\n\n🪷🪷🪷\n\nIn this video, Krishnaji explains who can truly be called a Sadguru and reveals the deeper essence of Sai Baba's divine state. A saint is one who has detached from Maya (illusion), but a Sadguru is the one who has completely conquered it. Such a Sadguru not only frees the disciple from worldly bondage but also guides the soul toward ultimate liberation.\n\nWe earn the right to call Baba our Sadguru only when we gain entry into His heart, understand His divine will, and experience His grace. Until then, neither are we true disciples, nor true devotees—merely uttering His name is not enough.\n\nThrough sacred leelas from the Sai Satcharita and the profound wisdom of Kabir’s dohas, Krishnaji reveals that only a supreme Sadguru can yearn so deeply for the upliftment of Saibaba's disciple. No ordinary human can carry such divine responsibility.\n\nIf even after receiving Baba’s presence, our inner transformation has not begun, then there is no greater misfortune in the entire universe.\n\nSachidanand Sadguru Sainath Maharaj Ki Jai!\n\n#SaiBaba #Sadguru #SaiLeelaRahasya #SpiritualWisdom #SaiTeachings #SaiSatcharita #SaiBhakti #KabirDoha #GuruKripa #SaiDevotion #SaiSpirituality #SaiMaharaj #SaiBlessings #SaiMiracles #SaiGrace #SaiPath …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "Sai baba, Saileela Rahasya, sadguru, Shirdi, Krishnani from saileela Rahsaan, Krishnaji Mumbai wale, Kabir dohe, Sai baba Sadguru, saisatcharitra, saileela, Krishnaji, Spiritual Video, Soul, Sant Kabir, Krishnaji Video, Spiritual Knowledge",
    "Views": "5,715 views",
    "Likes": "404"
  },
  {
    "Title": "स्वयं साईके आचरण से निष्काम कर्मयोग की शिक्षा | By Krishnaji",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SiSzvKo3MJ0",
    "Transcript": "This is no ordinary book; it is divine guidance, radiant with light. It is the autobiography of the Divine, narrated in His own words. Om Sai Ram Today I am taking a very important topic from the Sai Satcharita: Sai’s Nishkama Karma Yoga (selfless action). See, unless the Guru lives and demonstrates it, how can we live it ourselves? Whenever a Divine incarnation descends into this world, Their purpose is to elevate us all to the spiritual pinnacle where they reside. That is why They incarnate. They don't come merely to fulfill our petty desires. But they do fulfill those petty desires too, so that our faith in them grows, and we strive to understand their heart. And if we can do that - if we reach their heart and begin transforming ourselves accordingly - then one day, we will attain the seat of completeness where they sit, the fullness they embody. In his life, Baba showed how actions should be performed, the depth and grace of performing Karma. Through one leela, he lived and demonstrated selfless action. Today, we will explore that leela and try to understand its profound importance in life. As in the Bhagavad Gita, there is a verse: 'karmaṇy-evādhikāras te mā phaleṣhu kadāchana mā karma-phala-hetur bhūr mā te saṅgo ’stvakarmaṇi' We all know this verse from the Bhagavad Gita. Baba embodied this verse in his own life and showed it to us. There's a short story, a leela, almost like a parable Baba says, \"When I was very young...\" See, Baba appeared in Shirdi at the age of 16. So, this leela that Baba is narrating happened before he appeared in Shirdi. \"When I was very young,\" meaning perhaps 8, 10, or 12 years old Whether it actually happened or not is a deeper matter, but through this leela, he wants to teach us something profound. Baba says, \"When I was very young, I tied a cloth around my waist and set out in search of livelihood.\" In a verse Baba says: 'Ekda mi lahan asta, Phadka bandhun potabhavta, Dhanda milava nirvahapurta, Aanuni chitta nighalo.' \"I just need a job to sustain myself.\" This word 'Nirvahapurta' is very important, Meaning only enough for basic sustenance. \"With that intention, I left home to earn through some effort and hard work.\" He says, 'Chalta chalta beedgava, Aalo tethe ghetla visava, Fakiracha majhya nyarach kaava, Anand jeeva vaatala.' \"And so, wandering, in search of work, I reached Beed village\" \"And there, I found work in zari (gold thread embroidery)..\" To earn money, one must do some work. \"So, I got zari work and started doing it.\" Baba says, \"Mihi khaplo avishram,\" and I immersed myself fully in that work with utmost diligence. Now, we too say this often, “We have so many responsibilities in life. How can we find time for devotion to Baba amid all that?” Normally we ask this question. In a way, Baba is answering it. Baba says, \"Even though I came as the Lord of the universe, as an avatar, it doesn't mean I did nothing in my life. I too worked hard.\" \"And when I worked in this world, how did I do it?\" He's explaining that. He says that, 'Tikde milale jariche kaam' - There I got zari work, 'Mihi khaplo avishram' - \"I kept immersing myself, dedicating fully to the work..\" 'Phalale te majhe sakal shram, Paha parakram fakiracha' \"And my hard work bore fruit; see what the fakir did.\" Baba says, 'Majhya aadhich lavilele, Hushar hushar navajlele, Char poranhi te kaam kele, Tehi mapile te samayi' \"There were three other boys with me doing the zari work; I wasn't alone.\" \"And they too received daily wages..\" \"One did work worth 50 rupees, the second boy's worth 100 rupees, the third's 150 rupees, . and mine was the highest - double, 300 rupees.\" All four were probably working the same eight hours. Please understand this well. They worked only eight hours, but the one who worked harder got higher pay. So, one got 50 rupees - he must have been lazy, working carelessly. So, \"This is all you did; take 50 and go.\" Another worked a bit harder in those eight hours and got 100 rupees. In the same eight hours, one did even more and got 150 rupees. And Baba himself did the most, worth 300 rupees. \"Now, seeing this, my master was so pleased that he honoured Me with a zari turban and a shawl. honored me immensely, without limit, because \"This boy is diligent; wherever he goes in life, he will achieve something\".\" But Baba says further, that \"The zari turban, shawl he gave, the honor - I set all that aside.\" \"And thought in my mind that 'What I received is perishable. What my Lord, my Sadguru, will give me - that will be eternal..’ This is perishable; it may be given today but gone tomorrow. If I indulge in it, I will be left empty. I'll have to work hard again. What my master gave me in exchange for my labor, is perishable.\" But Baba says, \"I came into this world to earn the eternal, not the perishable.\" Here, Baba is teaching: First, when you work in this world, how should you do it? Work so hard, use your talent so fully, immerse yourself so completely. If the Lord has given you talent, skill, art - If you can earn millions in a month, then earn fully. Baba is teaching this. If you have talent, skill, passion for hard work, then work limitlessly. If you can earn one million in a month, earn one million. If five millions, earn five millions. But what he says next: \"I didn't use it on myself. I set the money aside as it was.\" 'Set it aside as it was' - meaning \"I gave it to charity, used it for public welfare. I didn't indulge in the glamour, show, pleasure, or enjoyment of it.\" 'If I earn more, I'll enjoy higher luxuries.'- That's what happens in our lives. We want to earn more to enjoy higher levels of indulgence. And that's the problem. Through this story, Baba is teaching us: \"Work fully. If you have the capacity to earn one million, earn it. But if your monthly expenses are just 5 to 10 thousand, use only that much and give the rest to charity. That's what he's teaching. So, what will happen? Try to understand carefully. The Supreme has created this universe, right? If He is the Master who created it, then the responsibility and right to nurture and adorn it is on us. Because this creation is His. When I use my earned money not for self-indulgence, not for personal expenses, not for sensual pleasures, but fully for public welfare, then I become the gardener protecting His garden. Just as God does. Indirectly, I become the God. Please try to understand well. It seems like a small leela, but it's not; Baba is saying something very deep. Just as the Lord runs this world selflessly, that's why He runs it so beautifully, making this garden bloom and fragrant. Similarly, Baba says, \"I spent minimally on myself - just enough for basic sustenance - and used the rest for charity.\" What a teaching! This is selfless action (Nishkama Karma Yoga). Now, many people do this: I have, eight-hour duty, household responsibilities, kitchen, this and that - where to find time? People often say this. But I say, first, why do you separate your office work from spiritual service? Why not turn it into spiritual service? As Baba is saying. If you're a doctor, immerse yourself fully - where others do one operation, do three; pour your soul into saving the patient at any cost, ensuring their peace and health. Don't look at how much money you're getting. If you're a teacher with 100 students, focus on the weakest one - how to uplift them; expend your energy there. The Lord is watching; that's selfless action. When you convert your field of work itself into spiritual service, then the Sadguru will dance with joy. What do we do? We keep spiritual service separate, and daily duties separate - that's where we get stuck. And as I'm saying, work those eight hours in the office with full honesty and dedication. Even if you sit before Baba for half an hour in the evening, samadhi will descend. Because you have practiced selfless action for those eight hours. Don't think the boss will be pleased, or you'll get an increment, bonus, or be praised, and earn respect from others. That's what Baba is saying: \"I received appreciation, but I didn't get trapped in it.\" \"I set it aside.\" In the same way, our workplace can become a worship place. If we work with such intention, This is what Baba is saying. We often make this mistake: Finish the work quickly, get rid of it, then sit with Baba's scripture. No, you won't be able to sit. If one has been dishonest at work, has shirked responsibilities there, and hasn't given 100% effort, then how can one truly enter the depths of the scripture in the evening? Think about it - is it possible? If in the evening you feel samadhi should descend in the scripture, in contemplation of Baba, then you must give those eight hours with utmost honesty at your workplace. That's why I named the topic \"Sai's Nishkama Karma Yoga.\" What a leela! For us, such things don't appeal. Miracles appeal more. Miracles, miracles, miracles.... Grabbing someone, seating them in front of a camera: \"Yes, share your experience.\" What nonsense? How long will this go on? We should feel ashamed. Stop somewhere. How long will you do this? And because of this, Baba has been defamed today. Because Baba's spiritual light hasn't come before the world. That's why so much negative propaganda against Baba - you all know at what level it's happening. And those raising questions - no one has answers; that's the problem. \"Your Sai Baba, in the first chapter, is abusing women. Are saints like that?\" Done. Blown away. You have no answer. \"Your Sai Baba ate and fed meat. How can he be a saint?\" You have no answer. \"Your Sai Baba was an addict, smoking chillum 24/7. How can he be a Sadguru?\" You have no answer. Because you haven't reached Baba's heart. And on top of that, what do we do? Complain that they did this or that. Will complaints fix it? We need to spread Baba's wisdom. The spiritual treasure Baba has filled in this scripture. Baba says in the 32nd chapter: \"My treasure is full. Bring bullock carts and dig it out, fill and take it.\" But only a true devotee will be able to fill it. That's the condition too. Not everyone can. But no one talks about this treasure. Just miracles,.... What a deep lesson this is - selfless karma yoga, what a beautiful leela. Baba has presented the entire karma yoga of the Bhagavad Gita in just 10 lines so beautifully. The whole third chapter of Bhagavad Gita is covered in this. He worked fully, more than the other four, but didn't use even a bit on himself; used the money for public welfare, set it aside without indulging. But our problem is, if we have a salary of 10-20 thousand, how to make it 50 so I can enjoy better? Our entire tendency is toward indulgence: Enjoy life. Even when we get less, we don’t learn to live within our means, we just keep thinking of doubling it. You'll only earn the perishable, not the eternal. Baba says: No matter how much this perishable my master, my boss gives, it's perishable. It won't last forever. My entire effort is to earn the eternal. The perishable doesn't excite me. It doesn't attract me. So, this Sai's selfless action is a very beautiful topic. If we miss such things from Baba's teachings, what remains? And this is the foundation. Karma yoga is the base. Upon this, the grand edifice of devotion and knowledge will stand. The stronger the foundation, the higher the edifice of devotion and knowledge will rise. If the foundation is weak, how will you build the edifice of devotion, knowledge, and yoga? It will wobble. It won't stand. There's one verse from this chapter. Verse 168 Baba says: \"Jo jo jaise jaise karil, to to taise taise bharil, dhyanat thevi jo majhe bol, saukhya amol pavel to.\" Whatever one does, one reaps accordingly. If you worked for 50 rupees, you'll get only 50 - whether in the worldly or spiritual realm. The same law applies in the spiritual world too. There, too, the more effort you put in spirituality, the more selfless service, devotion, and embodiment of knowledge, the more it expands. So, effort is needed in both realms. Conversely, in the 19th chapter, Baba says: If in this world you sit lazily, saying, \"Let the Lord feed me while I sit.\" Baba says, perhaps at some point I might even do that - feed you while you sit. But if you apply that to spirituality - \"Let my spirituality flourish while I sit\" then I don't know about that. For spirituality, you'll have to work very hard. You'll have to turn your blood into water, break your bones like dry wood. Only then will spirituality slowly, slowly bear fruit. The problem is, we don't want to hear or know such things. And today, countless channels don't want to tell them either. They just want miracles. Or there are some other kind of people. See, 80% of the channels on Baba today, that people run, they talk about miracles. Their channels run on that - just miracles. 15% of the channels give information. They have a vast repository of information. They pull it from scriptures, from magazines, and boldly present it to people. But no one wants to touch Baba's original spiritual wisdom. Even if they include scriptures, it’s only as information. If they talk about Sai Satcharitra, again, it’s just information. The original spiritual mystery cannot be grasped that way. Now, the question will always arise in your minds: Why don't we understand these things? Because it requires a different vision. First, selfless devotion must descend into your life. If your devotion is selfless, if you've gone through selfless action, only then can you unlock these gems, reveal these mysteries. If your devotion is filled with desires, if it is selfish, then I swear on Baba's feet: Even after millions of births in devotion to Baba, not a single leela will unfold to you. You must become selfless. And the fruit of selfless devotion is that, you won't ask anything from Sai Baba; you'll ask for Sai Baba himself. Selfless devotion gives you that power. You won't ask for perishable things from Baba; you'll ask for Baba himself. That's the power in selfless devotion. So, today, the meaning is clear: If Baba stands and asks everyone, \"Do you want something from me, or do you want me?\" 99% will say, \"Baba, what will I do with you? We have kept you at high pedestal in our lives. So that we can fulfill all our desires through you.\" Truly, if Baba says: \"Either I fulfill all your desires, or set them all aside and I myself come into your life.\" \"No, no, Baba, stay where you are. You look better there in the samadhi mandir. Don't come into my heart. Just keep solving all my life's problems.\" That's our intention. That's our understanding. That's our discernment and dispassion. That's our maturity. How will any leela unfold to us? Because the Sadguru is selfless. See, if you want to meet the Sadguru - imagine Baba is still in Shirdi in physical form, not as an idol. If you want to bring Baba into your life, you'll have to reach Baba. You'll have to go to Shirdi. You'll need to take entry into the village where Baba is there. Right? Only then can you have his darshan. So, what is Baba's village? Selfless action - that's Baba's village. Without becoming selfless yourself, how will you enter that village? On a superficial, peripheral level, we keep saying ‘Baba, Baba,… and the purpose behind it is: Since we do so much devotion to you, you must fulfill every desire. Every wish must be granted. Whether justified or not, whatever it is, you must fulfill it. And if one day Baba doesn't seem to do it: \"Nowadays, Sai Baba has no power. There's a new temple; let's go there. Heard a lot about it.\" Our devotion is so hollow. Then, when will we understand Shraddha and Saburi? Those two words are Baba's core mantra. Neither is our faith that firm in life, nor patience. Then it is impossible. So, this is Sai's selfless action - a very important topic. Because without understanding this leela, without immersing ourselves in selfless action, Baba's heart will not unfold. I'm being very straightforward. Often, I'm asked: How do you reach these truths? How can you say this? I say, if our devotion is pure, selfless, without expectations, then entry into Baba's heart is granted. Because I don't want anything from Baba. I want Baba. If I truly want Baba, why wouldn't Baba grant entry into his heart? And if I want things from Baba, then I'm very far. I'll keep begging from afar: \"Baba, do this; Baba, do that.\" Well, those are perishable. Even after getting them, do they give eternal peace? Or Eternal joy? Never. Whatever you get will either leave you, or you'll leave it. It's not eternal. Nothing obtained from Baba will stay permanent - not even children. Who knows, today it is, tomorrow it may not be: and sometimes, while you remain, it departs, or while it remain, you depart. This is transient. The world is perishable. That's why, live amid all, practice selfless action right from home. If four or five people live in the home, your way of living should be so different that you live for those four, die for those four. Keep no self-interest at all. Truly, if you do this for just two years, Baba's heart will unfold. Give as much comfort, respect, love and care as you can, to those four people. And you must not expect anything in return. If you live this way just for two years, you will get entry into Baba's heart. I'm not even talking about selfless action outside - start from home. And if you live like that, your mind purifies very quickly. In which the Lord of the universe can one day reside. And to be very honest, without passing through such selfless karma yoga, you cannot reach the Purna Brahman. It's impossible. Just with superficial devotion, you can't reach there. You can't reach the experience of Purna Brahman, means the realization: “I alone pervade the entire universe; all that exists is but Me.” Its foundation is selfless action. Because if you bring selfless action into life, only then will your devotion deepen, your knowledge expand. You'll attain yoga, and journey to the Purna Brahman. So, this Sai's Nishkama Karma Yoga. O Mind-Enchanting One, Remover of Curses and Suffering, Destroyer of Ignorance, Bestower of Liberation, The Supreme Giver of Auspiciousness, Embodiment of Truth, Consciousness, and Bliss, the Sacred Mother of countless embodiments of Sai. the True Form of Sai Himself Victory to the Divine Scripture: Shri Sai Satcharita.",
    "Description": "कृष्णाजीद्वारा प्रस्तुत यह वीडियो साईबाबा के जीवन में निहित *निष्काम कर्मयोग* के दिव्य रहस्य को उजागर करता है। बाबा ने स्वयं अपने पूरे जीवन में यही मार्ग अपनाया और कर्मण्येवाधिकारस्ते मा फलेषु कदाचन इस श्लोक को जी के दिखाया । बाबा की ये  लीला को साईसच्चरित्र (अध्याय ३२) की ओवियों के माध्यम से प्रकट किया गया है।\n\nयह संदेश देता है कि सांसारिक कार्यों को पूर्ण निष्ठा और समर्पण के साथ करते हुए भी हम उन्हें भक्ति में कैसे परिवर्तित कर सकते हैं। कार्यस्थल को उपासना स्थल बनाने की कला, भक्ति के लिए समय निकालने का रहस्य, और पूर्णब्रह्म तक पहुँचने का मार्ग – सब कुछ इस वीडियो में आध्यात्मिक दृष्टि से प्रस्तुत है।\n\nसाईबाबा का जीवन स्वयं इस सत्य का प्रमाण है कि निष्काम कर्मयोग केवल एक सिद्धांत नहीं, बल्कि साधक के जीवन का अनुभव बन सकता है।\n\n🪷🪷🪷\n0:00 Trailer \n2:54 कर्मण्येवाधिकारस्ते मा फलेषु कदाचन।\n3:13 साईके जीवन से कहानी\n4:02 साईसच्चरित अध्याय ३२ ओवी १५२, १५३, १५४\n10:17 मेहनत तो पूरा करो लेकीन.......\n12:10 संसार मे परमार्थ (भक्ति ) के लिए समय कैसे निकाले ?\n14:07 Workplace to Worship place \n15:39 आज साईबाब बदनाम क्यो?\n18:56 कर्मयोग बुनियाद है\n19:25  साईसच्चरित अध्याय ३२ ओवी १६८\n22:07 साईसच्चरित के रहस्य हम क्यो नही समझ आते ?\n24:56 साईबाबाके गावमे प्रवेश कैसे पाए ?\n26:42 कृष्णाजी आपको कैसे ये रहस्य समझते है ?\n27:58 निष्काम कर्मयोग अपने घरसे ही !\n29:17 पूर्णब्रम्ह तक कैसे पोहचे\n🪷🪷🪷\n\n\nThis video by Krishnaji reveals the divine secrets of Nishkam Karmayog (selfless action) embedded in Sai Baba's life. Baba himself walked this path throughout his life – performing every duty with dedication, yet never expecting any reward. The profound essence of “Karmanyeva Adhikaraste Ma Phaleshu Kadachana” is beautifully explained through Baba’s leelas and the sacred verses of Sai Satcharitra (Chapter 32).\n\nIt conveys how worldly duties, when performed with sincerity and surrender, can be transformed into acts of devotion. The video also shares how to turn your workplace into a place of worship, find time for bhakti amidst worldly responsibilities, and walk the path toward the Supreme Consciousness.\n\nSai Baba’s life stands as living proof that Nishkam Karmayog is not merely a philosophy – it is an experience to be lived by every seeker.\n\n\n#saisatcharitra #saibaba #nishkaamkarmyog #spiritualpath #saibhakti #gurutatva #divinewisdom …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "Krishnaji from Saileela Rahasy, Nishkaam Karmyog, Bhaktiyog, Saisatcharita, Saisatcharita Adhyay 32, spiritual wisdom of sai baba, krishnaji on saibaba, spiritual content, saibaba information, spiritual wisdom for Gen Z, Devotion, karmanye wadhikarste, Karm, Workplace to Worship",
    "Views": "3,499 views",
    "Likes": "329"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Depth of Vishnusahasranaam as said by Sai himself",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8K0SwYZnDfk",
    "Transcript": "This is no ordinary book; it is divine guidance, radiant with light. It is the autobiography of the Divine, narrated in His own words. Om Sai Ram. The significance of Vishnu Sahasranama, in the practice of devotion to Sai,. This is the topic. Before delving into the discourse on Vishnu Sahasranama. I first share a personal experience of Baba Himself. Thereafter, we shall enter this subject. Once, Baba felt a surge of compassion and mercy in His heart for Shyama. He perceived Shyama as a simple and innocent soul. Thus, Baba deemed that the Vishnu Sahasranama should descend into Shyama’s life. There was a devotee of Ramdas, reciting the Vishnu Sahasranama, With divine ingenuity, He took the sacred text and handed over to Shyama, Instructing him to begin chanting it daily, even if just one syllable at a time, but with proper pronunciation. Baba then shared a personal experience with Shyama, saying, “Once, my heart trembled with a ceaseless flutter, as though my very life-breath was about to depart. At that critical juncture, I placed the Vishnu Sahasranama upon my heart, And it was as if Allah Himself descended into my being.” Behold the divine manner in which Baba expresses this! While speaking of the Vishnu Sahasranama, He says, “It was as if Allah Himself descended into my being.” What a profound way of teaching! Baba repeatedly emphasized that Allah and Vishnu are one and the same. We call upon the Divine by different names, But let no doubt arise in the heart. Baba further narrated, “As soon as I began chanting the sacred names, The life force that was about to depart was preserved. It was as if I was granted a new life through the Vishnu Sahasranama. To convey the glory of these divine names to our hearts, Baba declared, ‘My life was saved because of chanting these names; Otherwise, that day, my death was certain.’” This is the direct and profound meaning of His words. The purpose behind sharing such a divine miracle is, to encourage devotees to begin the practice of chanting these sacred names. Simple. We shall delve into the deeper essence later. Simply put, start this practice of chanting from today itself. The Vishnu Sahasranama, In the tenth chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, known as Vibhuti Yoga. In this chapter, Lord Krishna reveals His countless divine manifestations, saying, “Among demons, I am Prahlada; Among mountains, I am Meru; Among months, I am Margashirsha; Among animals, I am the lion.” In essence, He tells about His divine manifestations He declares that whatever is exalted and great in this world Exists by His divine power alone. In a similar manner, Baba instructs Shyama, saying, “O Shyama, begin chanting the Vishnu Sahasranama. Your speech is not yet clear. Practice pronouncing each word properly and correctly. Start this practice daily, chanting one name at a time. First, let you pronunciation be perfect, through practice, And then strive to understand the meaning and divine glory hidden in each name.” For instance, consider the names: 'Om vishvam vishnu rvashatkaro bhoota-bhavya bhavat-prabhuh Bhoota-krut bhoota-bhrud-bhavo bhootatma bhoota-bhavanah' If you can comprehend the meaning of each word - Vishvam, Vishnu, Vashatkaro and assimilate it within your soul, If the essence of all thousand names permeates your being, Then the entire wisdom of Vedanta will dawn within you. Because, this is the divine method of Sage Vyasa, That He embedded the mysteries of Vedanta within the Vishnu Sahasranama. Thus, Baba indirectly guides Shyama, saying, “Take one name daily, but understand its meaning as well. Do not recite mechanically. Recitation is easy. Initially, you can practice and focus on pure pronunciation, ensuring clarity. But thereafter, it is said, 'Ojhe ojhe naam gheyi' Meaning, chant each name slowly while understanding its meaning. If you chant ‘Sai’ without knowing its meaning, Without grasping the depth hidden within the word ‘Sai,’ If you cannot pour the entire essence of Life, the depth of Sai Satcharitra into the name 'Sai', How can you infuse love into that name? Then it will become mechanical, 'Sai, Sai,.........', like a parrot’s repetition. Nothing of true worth shall be accomplished Thus, Baba advises, “First, refine your pronunciation, And then, chant each name with understanding.\" And He says, \"Even if you take just one Name daily, it is enough\" Baba does not indulge in superficiality. He always imparts the essence of truth. Why did Baba emphasize chanting one name daily? What is its meaning? Was it merely for recitation? No, it was to understand the meaning of each name. Even if you grasp the meaning of just one name each day, that is sufficient. In a thousand days, the thousand names will be complete. Thereafter, continue the practice. In Chapter 27, Verse 78 of the Sai Satcharitra, This entire divine incident is narrated, How Baba's heart trembled with a ceaseless flutter, How His life-breath was about to depart, and at that moment He placed the Vishnu Sahasranama on His heart, And His breath was stabilized. It was as if the Divine Himself became Baba’s life force, saving Him from certain death. This is the miracle of Vishnu Sahasranama. Indirectly, Baba’s purpose in sharing this profound incident is clear: “O devotee, begin chanting the divine names today itself. Do not waste the precious time granted in this human form. Make full use of this sacred opportunity.” - this is what Baba had to say. For, as it is said, if you chant the name without understanding its meaning, Without clarity, how long can you sustain such chanting? Would you chant for a long time? It becomes a mechanical process, and you may grow weary, and leave it. But when the depth of meaning dawns upon you, The joy of chanting increases gradually, and it will keep increasing each day. Where you once chanted for ten minutes, You will chant for twenty; Where twenty, you will chant for two hours; And where two hours, the chanting will continue all day long. For the joy is increasing day by day. With full awareness and heartfelt understanding, You immerse yourself in the divine name. There are four stages to chanting the divine name: Vaikhari, Madhyama, Pashyanti, and Para Vaikhari refers to chanting aloud with the tongue, in a manner that can be heard by the ears. For instance, reciting, ‘Om Shri Sainathaya Namah.’ This is Vaikhari. Madhyama, on the other hand, is when the tongue moves silently within, without any outward sound. None outside can hear it, for the chanting resounds only within, audible solely to your own inner being. This is Madhyama. Pashyanti means, the tongue is not moving, yet the Divine Name resounds within the heart, and the ears can still perceive it. And Para is when that remembrance of the Name has permeated every fibre of your being where, in truth, it is the Supreme Himself who is chanting within you, while you sit in stillness. That is Para. 'Peeche peeche Hari phire, kahat Kabir Kabir' Meaning, Kabir has now taken the Name so ceaselessly, that now even in sleep, Hari is chanting from within. That too He is chanting 'Kabir, Kabir'. Which means you reach to that state, which is known as 'Para Vani'. So, we have to reach there. But the Lord will take up that Name within you only when you show such intensity, such sincerity, and such earnest effort. Ensuring not a single moment passes without the Divine’s name. When your practice is steadfast, Then one day, the Divine Himself begins chanting within you, And that is Para Vani, the ultimate goal. The purpose is to reach there. Now, consider the importance of these thousand names. If someone wants to chant these names, First of all, to chant all thousand names may take 20 to 30 minutes. So, you dedicated these 30 minutes to Upasana, and trained yourself to sit at one place for 30 minutes and engage in chanting. So, now you are able to sit at one place for 30 minutes. Initially, this was impossible. Because the resolve to complete the thousand names anchors you. Your posture becomes steady. Now, you can sit at one place and chant for 30 minutes. This is the first stage. Then the second stage, one may realize that, 'I am reciting the names mechanically, but I do not know the meaning.' But Krishna Ji advises, it is essential to understand the meaning of each name. So, you begin to read the meaning of each name alongside the chant. This may take about an hour and a quarter. Now, this comes into practice. Is that clear? I am explaining these stages: Do not merely chant mechanically and leave it at that. In the beginning, mechanical chanting is acceptable, but in the second stage, you must understand the meaning of each name. By imbibing the depth and grandeur of each name, its divine potency (vibhuti), into your heart, devotion and heartfelt emotion will arise. Then, you will chant those names with profound devotion. This is the second stage. Now, what does Baba say further? The thousand divine potencies (vibhutis) of Vishnu reside within the Guru. Hence, it is said: “Gurur Brahma, Gurur Vishnu, Gurur Devo Maheshwara, Gurur Sakshat Parabrahma, Tasmai Shri Gurave Namah.” So, the thousand names of Vishnu are encapsulated in the single name of the Sadguru. After fully assimilating the depth of these thousand names into your heart, realize this truth: If these thousand divine potencies exist anywhere, they reside in the name of my Sadguru. With this conviction, set aside the Vishnu Sahasranama and begin chanting Baba’s name as, “Samrath Sai”. Believing that the profundity of those thousand names is inherent in Baba’s name. Let me clarify why I say this. I will first present a verse from the Sai Satcharitra, so no doubts linger in your mind. Kabir Ji has also said: 'Guru Govind dono khade' On one side there is vishnu with His thousand names 'Guru govind dono khade, Kaake lagu paaye' 'Balihari guru aapne, Govind diyo bataye' O Gurudev! If not for You, even in countless births, the depth of Govind could never be understood. It is Your grace alone that gives me clarity of Govind/ Vishnu Without you there would be no way to understand Govind. Kabir Ji further says, 'Kabira te nar andh hai' 'Kabira te nar andh hai, Guru ko kehte aur' Vishnu and Guru are not one, Guru is someone else. Guru is lesser than Vishnu. Those who say this are blind. Blind is the one who considers the Guru lesser than Vishnu 'Kabira te nar andh hai, Guru ko kehte aur, Hari ruthe..' If Hari is displeased, 'Guru thor hai' - the Guru can protect. But if the Guru is displeased, Then in all three worlds there is none to save you. 'Guru ruthe nahi thor' This truth is affirmed in Chapter 49, Verse 16 of the Sai Satcharitra, A very important verse. I am explaining why, after internalizing the depth of the Vishnu Sahasranama, one must transition to chanting Sai’s name. Chapter 49, Verse 16: 'Tirth, Vrat, Yagn, Daan..' Please listen attentively 'Tirth, vrat, yagna, daan, yahuni thor tapacharan' Pilgrimages, vows, sacrifices, and charity - ascetic practices (tapacharan) surpass these 'Tyahuni adhik haribhajan' Yet, greater than asceticism is the chanting of Hari’s name. The recitation of Vishnu’s thousand names. 'Nijguru dhyan sarvadhik' Clear What is said: 'Nijguru dhyan sarvadhik' And even above Hari, the meditation on the Sadguru is supreme. This means there is a long journey before one arrives at chanting Baba’s name. Now, when you chant Baba’s name, it embodies the glory of Vishnu’s thousand names. With their meanings, those thousand names are inherent in Sai’s name. All that profundity is encapsulated within it. With this understanding, imagine how much devotion, how much faith, how much depth you will bring to chanting that name. The journey begins with the thousand names of Vishnu and culminates in the single name of Sai. Thus, one who chants Vishnu’s thousand names is like a student in nursery. But if they fully embrace the depth of those names, pour them into Baba’s name, and become wholly absorbed in chanting Baba’s name, then the thousand names of Vishnu are contained within that one name. In essence, the practice of Nama smaran begins with a rudimentary process. But if your samadhi is attained in Baba’s single name, that is the ultimate destination. I am not speaking from my own imagination; I am presenting the profundity of the Sai Satcharitra. Consider further verses to affirm this truth. The first and second verses of Chapter 27: 'Drudh dharilya Shri Sadguru charan, ghade Brahmadi traymurti daman' If you surrender yourself completely at the feet of the Sadguru, if you take refuge in those sacred feet, if you hold onto Guru's feet, you automatically pay homage to Brahma, Vishnu, and Mahesh. Is that clear? You offer salutations to the Supreme Brahman for the Guru is the embodiment of Parabrahma. 'Swananda ghana suprakt…' You become entitled to boundless bliss, for you are entwined at the feet of the Supreme Brahman. It continues: 'Marita eka sagari budi…' If you dive into the ocean, 'Sadati sakal tirtha parvadi…' you honor all the sacred rivers and pilgrimage sites of the world. For the final abode of all rivers is the ocean; all rivers flow and merge into it. The waters of all rivers are already within the ocean. Thus, by paying homage to the ocean, you honor all rivers. Similarly, by completely surrendering to the Sadguru, the 33 crore deities reside at His sacred feet. Thus, Baba instructs: First, understand the depth and meaning of each of Vishnu’s names. Then, assimilate them into your heart. And pour that entire radiance into the feet of Sadguru Sai. With full awareness of the glory of those thousand names, begin chanting that one name with profound depth. The day you attain samadhi in that name, it will be that profound. 'Sadati sakal tirtha parvadi, Baista gurupadi deuni dadi, Aatudti budi sakal dev' All 33 crore deities reside at the Guru’s feet. The journey begins with Baba’s instruction to Shyama: Chant the Vishnu Sahasranama- a mechanical process at first. Start with proper pronunciation, with clarity, and then understand the depth of each word, the meaning of each name. The day those thousand names are fully imprinted in your heart, take the essence of those thousand names and pour it at the feet of the Sadguru. Then, begin chanting Sai’s name. If, for two hours, you chant with unwavering devotion, forgetting the world and yourself, and only the name remains, then truly, your practice of chanting is complete. In my view, the Vishnu Sahasranama begins with Vishnu’s thousand names and culminates in the single name of the Sadguru. I know I have presented a unique topic. But for those who have faith in the Guru, Firstly, the verse I cited, from the Sai Satcharitra, should leave no doubts if understood clearly. The 16th verse of Chapter 49. 'Tirtha, vrata, yajna, dana…' Ascetic practices surpass - pilgrimages, vows, sacrifices, and charity Yet, chanting Hari’s name surpasses asceticism. And above all, meditation on the Sadguru is supreme. This is stated clearly. If, despite this, questions arise, I leave you with your questions. O Mind-Enchanting One, Remover of Curses and Suffering, Destroyer of Ignorance, Bestower of Liberation, The Supreme Giver of Auspiciousness, Embodiment of Truth, Consciousness, and Bliss, the Sacred Mother of countless embodiments of Sai. the True Form of Sai Himself Victory to the Divine Scripture: Shri Sai Satcharita.",
    "Description": "The essence of Spiritual practices (Sadhana) is Namasmaran—the remembrance of the Divine Name. It is not just chanting but the soul’s journey towards God. In Shri Sai Satcharitra (Chapters 27 & 49), Sai Baba advised Shama to recite the Vishnusahasranam, teaching that the Name itself is the foundation of purity and true spiritual practice.\n\nThe four stages of Namasmaran—Vaikhari, Madhyama, Pashyanti, and Para—along with Saint Kabir’s divine wisdom, reveal how the pure mind naturally merges with the Divine through the power of the Name.\n\nThrough this discourse, Krishnaji unveils the glory of Namasmaran, reminding us that Vishnusahasranam is the divine form of the highest sadhana. To experience more such profound leelas and teachings of Sai Baba, explore our other videos and walk with us on this sacred journey of Sai Sadhana.\n\n🪷🪷🪷\n\n0:00 Trailer \n1:56 क्यू साईबाबाने शामा को विष्णुसहस्त्रनाम पढ़ने बोला?\n7:59 अध्याय २७, ओवी क्र ७८ \n9:50 नामस्मरण करने के ४ प्रकार\n10:47 संत कबीर दोहा (कबीरा मन निर्मल भाया)\n13:29 विष्णूके 1000 विभूतियाँ गुरुमे बसते है (गुरु ब्रम्हा गुरुविष्णु)\n14:24 संत कबीर दोहा (गुरु गोविंद दोऊ खडे )\n15:02 संत कबीर दोहा (कबीरा ते नर अंध है)\n15:56 अध्याय ४९, ओवी १६\n18:51 अध्याय २७, ओवी १\n19:38 अध्याय २७, ओवी २\n21:55 मुक्म्मल नाम साधना\n\n🪷🪷🪷\n\nअध्यात्मिक साधना का मूल तत्व है— नामस्मरण। यह केवल जप या उच्चारण नहीं, बल्कि आत्मा की परमात्मा से मिलने की एक साधना है। बाबा ने शामा को विष्णुसहस्त्रनाम पढ़ने का जो आदेश दिया, उसके पीछे यही संदेश है कि नाम ही साधक की शुद्धी और साधना की शुरुवात है।\n\nविष्णुसहस्त्रनाम पढ़ने का महत्व, नामस्मरण के चार प्रकार, संत कबीर की अमृतवाणी, और श्री साई सच्चरित्र के अध्याय 27 व 49 की ओवियाँ—सब मिलकर यह प्रकट करते हैं कि जब मन निर्मल हो जाता है, तब नाम स्वयं ही साधक को परमात्मा तक पहुँचा देता है।\n\nसाईं बाबा का यही संदेश है कि नामस्मरण ही सर्वोच्च साधना है, और विष्णुसहस्त्रनाम उसका दिव्य स्वरूप है—जो साधक को सांसारिक बंधनों से मुक्त कर आत्मिक शांति और ईश्वर-साक्षात्कार की ओर ले जाता है।\n\nइस सम्पूर्ण विवेचन कृष्णाजी नामस्मरण की महिमा उजागर करते हैं। ऐसी ही गहन आध्यात्मिक लीलाओं और उपदेशों को जानने के लिए हमारे अन्य वीडियो भी अवश्य देखें और साई साधना की इस यात्रा में सहभागी बनें।\n\n\n#saisatcharitra #saisadhna #namasmaran #sai #saibaba #vishnusahasranama #krishnaji #spirituality #bhakti #guru #kabir #divine #meditation #devotion #sainath …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "vishnu sahasranamam, importance of namasmaran, sai baba teachings, krishnaji sai leela rahasya, sai baba devotion, spiritual journey with sai baba, power of namasmaran, sai leela explained, Naam Jap",
    "Views": "5,838 views",
    "Likes": "483"
  },
  {
    "Title": "एक झोली में फूल भरे है, एक झोली में कांटे... \"भावार्थ \"",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R_OQDqeivVQ",
    "Transcript": "You cannot experience only good moments alone. Bad experiences will inevitably come along too. So many people are seated here. Can anyone claim that- \"No, Krishna Ji, you are wrong. We have only enjoyed joy in life.\" No such person exists in the entire cosmos. So, this song is telling us, O mortal, if you have come into this universe taking a body, you are entangled in dualities. This mill of duality grinds relentlessly. And you are being ground like grain in it, pulverized. The song conveys exactly that. One basket is filled with flowers. One basket with thorns. And what is the reason? The very creation of this world is a mixture. So, Baba is here to lift us above these dualities and pour the ocean of bliss within us. \"I must rise above my body and intellect to attain my true essence.\"- This should be clear. This is no ordinary book; it is a luminous advice. Their own autobiography in their own words. Om Sai Ram There is a couplet of Kabir Ji. Most of you have probably heard it. 'Chalti chakki dekh ke, Diya Kabira roye,' 'Chalti chakki dekh ke, Diya Kabira roye, Do pathan ke beech mein, Sabut bacha na koye' What does he mean? Many people interpret this in their own ways. That's fine, I won't delve into that. But this couplet fits perfectly with this song. The two grinding stones represent duality These are the stones of duality. And the mill that turns is time itself. The wheel of time. In the wheel of time, everyone gets caught between dualities. Everyone gets ground down. Sometimes we get joy, sometimes sorrow. Sometimes good experiences arrive, sometimes bad ones. Sometimes the mind stays pure, sometimes it becomes utterly impure. Meaning, a person's behavior is never consistent because they are trapped in dualities. This world is filled with dualities. Look at how the world is created. Please understand this well. There is sunlight, and there is shade. There is day, and there is night. Isn't it? There is white, and there is black. There is light, and there is darkness. There is joy, and there is sorrow. There are virtues, and there are vices. There is beauty, and there is ugliness. There is life, and there is death. The Lord has crafted this entire cosmos, this entire universe, from polarities. Yet, you may wish to exist within this cosmos And yearn for only day, never night, Only joy, never sorrow, Only peace, never unrest. It's impossible. Because, the Lord has created this world with two opposing poles. Why is there such duality? Duality means two opposing poles. Have you ever noticed, that the Lord created this universe from the five great elements? We all know that. Earth, water, fire, air, ether (space). Have you ever observed that these five elements oppose each other? Like Earth is there. Earth is so dense. So heavy, upon which the entire universe rests. And on the other side, air is so light. Does it have any weight? So, one side so heavy, and air so light. One side water so cool, and on the other, fire so hot. Have you ever pondered this? The universe is created from opposing poles, so you must face these opposing poles until your last breath. You must face them. You cannot enjoy only happiness. You cannot enjoy only peace. You cannot experience only good moments. Bad experiences will inevitably come along too. So many people are seated here. Can anyone claim that- \"No, Krishna Ji, you are wrong. We have only enjoyed joy after joy in life.\" No one. No one in the whole cosmos. Not just this assembly - perhaps 300 or 400 people here today. But I say, show me one such person in the entire cosmos who can say they have only experienced good things. Only a saint or the Divine has the right to say that, one who has transcended these dualities. Risen above them. Reached the state beyond duality. They can say it. But they won't speak of joy or sorrow. They will say, I am pure bliss. Because bliss has no opposite. Bliss. Ananda. If you dwell amidst dualities, you must endure both. Then you might say, no, I want to experience only one in life. To suppress the other is impossible. You have to face both things. If you rise above both - \"I neither want joy nor sorrow.\" Both are relative. Both are dangerous. The very desire for joy plunges me into sorrow. I want neither joy nor sorrow. Rising above both, I want to seek my true essence of Sat-Chit-Ananda. And when you become a partaker of bliss, both fall away. So, this song is telling us, O mortal, if you have come into this universe taking a body, then you are entangled in dualities. This mill of duality grinds relentlessly. And you are being ground like grain in it, pulverized. Sometimes happiness comes, sometimes grief. Sometimes good experiences, sometimes bad. Sometimes the body stays healthy, sometimes it falls ill. Sometimes honor comes, sometimes dishonor. Sometimes it feels good inside, sometimes you become so despairing. So depressed that you wonder, why this life? That means, you never get a consistent experience. The song conveys exactly that. 'One basket filled with flowers. One basket with thorns, there must be some reason.' And the reason is that the very creation of this world is a mixture. You must accept this reality, this bitter truth. Have you ever thought - a person buys a ticket, boards a bus, heads to Tirupati. A sacred place, a holy pilgrimage site. But the bus carrying 60 people climbs up, reaches the summit, then tumbles down, and all 60 perish. What sin did they commit? Another sets out for Vaishno Devi pilgrimage. Climbing the mountain, an accident happens. Everyone in the vehicle dies. What sin did they commit? We read about this every day - they set out for good deeds, so why the tragedy? Baba says, there must be some reason, and falls silent. The reason is that this world is made of dualities. These things will keep happening, child, until your last breath; you will be ground in dualities. The only way is, to transcend them, rise above. Rise above the body consciousness. As long as you believe \"I am the body,\" you will be ground in dualities. This is the soul of the song. Is what I'm saying making sense? As long as you consider yourself the body, you are in duality. And in duality, you won't get just positive experience till your last breath. You must endure both. If you're enjoying joy, endure sorrow too. If you enjoy respect, you must also bear the pain of insult. So, this universe is made of dualities. Its very creation is a mixture. The Lord crafted the Universe from two opposing poles. So, these opposing poles will be present in your life 24/7. You can't avoid any of it. That's why Baba says you must rise above it. Drop the dualities. Drop joy too. Joy is the root of sorrow. From the womb of joy, sorrow is born. If you drop the desire for joy, sorrow falls away automatically, and you become entitled to bliss. And remember, bliss is an ocean; joy is merely a drop. So, Baba wants to lift us above dualities and pour that ocean of bliss within us through this song. But if you say, no, I want to stay in the world, consider myself the body, and still enjoy only joy - impossible. You must drop the body-ego. Then you don't become entitled to joy. Yes. But let me tell you - you become entitled to bliss. Joy falls away too. Joy starts seeming trivial. Receiving respect brings fleeting happiness; eating desired food brings fleeting happiness; indulging in sensual pleasures brings fleeting happiness; sexual gratification brings fleeting happiness. These are all gutter-level joys. If you've come as a human, it's not to indulge in gutter-level joys. The Lord sent you as human to experience bliss in this world. That is your birthright. You are not here for gutter-level joys, For within joy's womb, sorrow exists as a seed. Suppose today someone honors you greatly. For example, I came here today. Normally, I say this because I have no status that you would honor me. But suppose I enjoy that honor. Then, when dishonor comes in my life, I won't be able to bear it. Because in the womb of honor hides the pain of dishonor. If I enjoy honor today, I won't endure dishonor. It's duality. That's why, drop the attachment to good experiences first. Drop all those desires. And embrace your true essence beyond joy and sorrow - bliss. Yes. Then this doesn't apply to you: One basket filled with flowers. One basket with thorns, there must be some reason. What do you care? You've risen above it. There's a Marathi song. You might have heard it or not. 'Vitthala tu veda kumbhar..' There's a Marathi song: Vitthala, you are a mad potter. 'Phirtya chaka varti desi, maati la aakra, Vitthala tu veda kumbhar' He says, a potter places clay on the wheel and shapes various pots. You are like that, a mad potter. What do you do? You take clay, mix it with water. Fine? Then let air touch it. Give it the sun's heat so it becomes a pot. You create a vessel from four opposing elements. And you are the mad potter. You create this creation. You destroy this creation. You build it. You devastate it. Your ways are truly wondrous. So, this song explains that beautifully. Yesterday, someone asked about the accident in Pahalgam. Was it their karma, their fate, or nature's decree? It was both. Because nature's decree is such - I don't know when what will happen to me. Why talk of others? Tomorrow, such an accident could happen to me too. We must learn from them that tomorrow, such an incident could befall my life too. Because this world is made of dualities. Anything can happen anytime. It could happen to me too. Before such an accident occurs, I must rise above body-consciousness. Drop body-ego and immerse in my soul essence. That's the way. If you keep raising these questions, there's no answer. So, He is that mad potter. Nature's decree will continue. Somewhere floods come, entire villages collapse. Tsunamis arrives, sweeping away thousands. Now, what questions will you raise to nature? If clouds rain evenly, life flourishes. If just the right amount of rain falls on fields and gardens, grains grow well. Countless people live. But if that same water rains excessively in one place, floods come, taking away so many. So, this is nature. And there's no answer for it. It is just like this. There's no answer for it. The only way is to rise above this nature. But if you say, no, I want to remain part of nature. But let only happiness abound in life. Impossible. Is what I'm saying sinking in? So, this song is profoundly deep. There's a bhajan by Meera Ji. You might have heard it. I'll take a few lines. Did you understand this song? 'Karm ki gati nyari santo' Meera Ji says the outline of karma - you can't fathom it. It's very difficult to comprehend You can't catch it. Your intellect will tire searching for reasons. The only way is to rise above body-consciousness. Otherwise, you won't find the answer. So, she says, the ways of karma are mysterious, O saints. The path of karma is wondrous. Very strange. Not easily understood, that why something happens to someone. You'll spend your life searching for answers but won't find them. Because, Meera Ji says the path is very mysterious. 'Bade bade nayan die miragan ko, ban ban phirat udhaari..' Now, the deer, the stag. The Lord gave it large eyes. But those large eyes bring equal unrest. In truth, musk resides in its own navel. But it wanders the forests chasing that fragrance, thinking it's coming from somewhere else. It wanders and dies. Similarly, O human, why are you trapped in dualities? Within you is the treasure of bliss. An ocean surges inside. Turn inward and behold that bliss. Why wander like the deer? Large eyes given, but unrest increases too. It roams outward, goes to corners, and finally tires and dies. Next she says, 'Ujjval varan deenhi bagalan ko, koyal kar deenhi kaari..' Have you heard the heron's voice? It's harsh. There is no sweetness in its voice. But the color you gave it is pure white. And the cuckoo, you made black. Gave it a crow-like color. But filled its voice with boundless sweetness. Hearing its sweet coo, one enters meditation. But why do you do this? No answer. The heron with harsh voice, you gave it pure white color, and black color to the cuckoo, but such sweetness in its voice. So, this diversity, this opposition, Why did you create it? What to ask? Impurity is interlaced within its very creation. Further she says, 'Auran deepan jal nirmal kinhi, samundar kar deenhi khaari..' You made river water sweet - a small stream flowing, benefiting only those nearby. Not the whole universe. And you made the vast ocean, salty. What is this? Meera Ji asks the Divine, what way is this of creating the universe? 'auran deepan jal nirmal kinhi,' So, you made the river water pure and sweet. And the ocean is immense, filled with water, but you made it salty. But if that salty water wants to become pure and sweet, it must endure the sun's heat. It evaporates, rises as vapor, converts to clouds, and when clouds rain, that salty water falls as sweet. But to become sweet, salty water must pass through great austerity. Similarly, every body is an ocean of salty water. All these bodies are oceans of salty water. But if they endure austerity, burn in Baba's divine 'Dhuni', they can become sweet. They can transcend dualities. Rise above dualities. Attain their true Sat-Chit-Ananda essence. And next, she says, 'moorkh ko tum raaj deeyat ho, pandit phirat bhikhaari..' A fool, illiterate or a senseless person, you make him the king. and one with knowledge, you make him beg door to door. What is this universe of yours? So much contradiction. Finally, she says, the ways of karma are mysterious, O saints. And leaves it here. Meaning, don't go searching; answers won't come. It remains mysterious. The only thing you can do is: I don't want to live in this duality-filled creation with body-ego. After realizing this. If the creation's decree is such - anything can happen anytime - if this is true, then I no longer trust it. I must rise above body-ego to attain my true essence. This clarity is essential. That's why such songs are created. In the last, she says, 'Meera ke prbhu giridhar naagun raaja ji ko kaun bichaari..' The Purna Parabrahma incarnation, the full Divine, who placed all these dualities in life, in nature, but no one devotes to Him. They grind away in dualities and die, but no one strives through devotion to rise above. Saying this, the song ends: 'Karam ki gati nyaari Santo' Now, another example: Lord Rama. In Rama Ji's life, there is so much righteousness, ethics, purity, sacrifice, surrender. But what did Rama Ji gain except sorrow? What did he gain? Lifelong sorrow. In childhood, before eight, he underwent upanayana and was sent to Gurukul, there He was tested in all the ways. After, returning from Gurukul, He got married, He spent barely three nights before departing for 14 years of exile Pain upon pain. And on the other side, Ravana, so unrighteous. Indulgent in vices, full of desires. But enjoying luxuries. Living in golden Lanka. Enjoyments upon enjoyments. So, countless examples. Nature is like this. Don't ponder it too much. Instead of wasting energy on it. \"Nature's decree is just this. I must rise above it.\" Work diligently on that, and it will succeed. Now, let's come to the main song. 'ek jholi me phool bhare hai ek jholi me kaante, koi kaaran hoga' So. its first stanza is: 'pahale banati hai takadeere phir banate hai shareer,' 'ye sai ki kaareegari hai tu hai kyon gambhir', Remember, before your body arrived, your karmas were accounted for. \"Their karmas are so lowly, so good, so bad.\" Accordingly, birth is granted here. Meaning, it's predetermined. Destiny is shaped first, then the body follows. Hence, some are born millionaires, in millionaire homes from childhood, and some born beggars in poverty. It's already decided. It is predetermined. Destiny is shaped first, then the body follows. You have no control over it. Neither birth is in your hands, nor life. Do you know when death will come? Where? That's not in your hands either. Yet, 24/7, people say, I do this, I do that. What do you do? What can you do? You didn't take birth on your own, The Lord tossed you into the womb, so you came. Life too, lived by His grace. He gave breaths, so they continue. And you won't even choose death. Can anyone here claim, \"No, I know my death; I'll decide it?' Death is unknown when, how - no one knows. But in between, \"I am doing, I am doing.\" What are you doing? You can't do anything. 'Pahale banati hai takadeere phir banate hai shareer, ye sai ki kaareegari hai tu hai kyon gambhir' Meaning, from past lives' karmas, destiny forms, Prarabdha forms, and body is given accordingly. This is clarified. Good karmas bring joy, bad bring sorrow - you all know. But if joy comes, you'll get attached to it. And if you get excessive joy, and get entangles in it, you'll err unknowingly. It's not that after joy, no mistakes happen. Conversely, in joy, mistakes increase, because you're unconscious then. Not alert. Conversely, in pain, troubles, wrong actions decrease. Because the whip is already falling. What wrong will you do? But when life is going smoothly, mistakes multiply. So, joy is also dangerous - it leads to mistakes, then suffering. I say, joy is more dangerous than sorrow. One who understands this is wise. I repeat: Joy is more dangerous than sorrow. One who grasps this becomes a spiritual seeker. A movie line comes to mind, recent movie: If sorrow is written in fate, a reason forms anyway. If sorrow is written in fate, reason arises. If accident is meant to happen, it will happen. If you are meant to be bedridden for two months, you will. You can't escape it. If a fall or fracture is fated, it will happen. That is why, when life is going well, spend those moments in spiritual practice, in devotion. Then, when difficult times come, your mind will already be above body-consciousness - and you will not feel the pain in the same way. But our problem is, we remember God when in trouble. When life flows in comfort and pleasure, what do we do with God then? Everything is passing smoothly. But truly, that's the deception. For it is in times of ease that we commit mistakes, and according to those mistakes, suffering is bound to come. It will come - 100%. Thus, joy is more dangerous than sorrow. Do you know what the real problem is? When hardships befall us, we rush to the temples, we run to the Guru, crying - “Save me from this trouble!” But the Guru thinks, “This fellow comes to me every time, always bringing his troubles. Not once has he come before me saying, ‘Master, I have committed these wrongs. And because of them, I now suffer these pains. So first, whatever sorrow You wish me to endure, I will. But purify my tendencies, cleanse my polluted mind. If that is cleansed, sorrow will never again enter my life.’ But such a thought never arises in him. He only comes again and again saying, ‘Remove this problem, remove that problem.’ But why that problem came in your life? He never works on the cause. He does not wish to wash the filth of his mind. He only wants the outer effects corrected. He pleads - “No Baba, first take me out of this crisis.” And Baba says, “If I rescue you from this trouble today, you will commit an even greater mistake tomorrow.\" Therefore, purify your mind. Sanctify your mind. If there is no inner filth, then wrong actions will not arise. But how many go to God or Guru with this prayer? Tell me - how many truly approach the Sadguru saying, “I have come only to be cleansed. My mind is so impure, Baba, wash me clean.” How many go with such a feeling? Kabir Ji has said in a couplet: “Dil ka marham na mila, jo mila so garzi. “Dil ka marham na mila, jo mila so garzi. Kahe Kabir aasmaan phata, kahaan tak seeve darzi.” Our hearts remain wounded, filled with inner filth, yet we never reflect upon our own mind. We never come to God with that feeling. Whoever comes, comes with his own selfish desires, his own wants and demands. Kabir Ji says, I searched the cosmos, but didn't found solace for my heart Not one comes to the Divine saying: erase my mind's dirt. No, erase my problems. Erase my troubles. What is this? This is like watering a tree's roots, but only cutting branches from above. What will happen? “Dil ka marham na mila, jo mila so garzi. Kahe Kabir aasmaan phata, kahaan tak seeve darzi.” The Sadguru is saying, your mind is as vast as the sky, but it is torn and rent apart. How far can I mend it? You do such selfish devotion, and due to that, committing acts out of selfishness, you have torn your fabric so much; even if I stitch it, how far will I? But if, If your deeds are righteous, if your mind is pure, if your heart is sanctified, would you commit wrong actions? Would you fall into misery? But no one works on this, They only want a temporary solution. A sincere man would say, “No Baba, these sufferings have come to me because of my own deeds. I see how filthy my mind is. Give me whatever pain You wish, but first, purify my mind.\" Such is the prayer of an honest seeker. But the prayer of the dishonest is: “Leave my mind as it is, but remove all my problems.” Such is the prayer of the ignorant. 'Pahale banati hai takadeere phir banate hai shareer, ye sai ki kaareegari hai tu hai kyon gambhir' This is the artistry of Sai. Why then do you take it so seriously? This play will continue. And in the next stanza he says, 'naag bhi das le to mil jaaye kisi ko jeevan daan, chinti se bhi mit sakata hai kisi ka naamo nishaan,' Sometimes, even if bitten by a serpent (Kaalsarp), one survives. One may escape the jaws of death in a terrible accident. One may live again after the most critical surgery. And yet, another person may pass away in deep sleep, What will you say then? This is the mystery of the universe. Is there any answer to this? A person may live again after the most critical surgery. The world marvels. They thought he was gone. I recall Amitabh Bachchan, year 1982. Coolie movie shooting was going on. A major accident took place. How he passed those four months, only the Lord knows. Whole world thought he won't survive. Countless hearts lifted their prayers for him. Outside Breach Candy Hospital in Bombay, Crowds gathered, with tears in their eyes. Pleading to the Divine: \"Save this man.\" Indians love so intensely, see, so wholeheartedly. But those prayers bore fruit, and he survived from death. Stands before us today. So, sometimes such miracles happen. And sometimes, a man dies while in sleep. Was fine last night. What happened in sleep? Don't know. He got a heart attack in sleep and he died. So, you can't understand these this with logic. This world is like that. Don't get entangled in these puzzles. Don't set out to find answers. Rise above this world. This song tells that. 'dhan ka bistar mil jaaye par neend ko tarase nain, kaanton par so kar bhi aaye kisi ke dil ko chain,' What a line. 'dhan ka bistar mil jaaye par neend ko tarase nain,' Ravana stays in golden Lanka, He has a royal palace, but his Karmas are so filthy, that he never slept peacefully. While Lord Rama, for 14 years He just had thorns upon thorns in life, Troubles upon troubles But such inner purity that those thorns became flowers. The whole game is not external. It depends on how pure you are within. if you are pure and complete from within, you can even turn the external thorns into flowers. But if you are inwardly bankrupt and dishonest, even in a royal palace, peace will elude you. The pleasure that Ravana enjoyed was like gutter-water. The pleasure that Ravana enjoyed was like gutter-water. But the sorrows endured by Rama for the sake of Dharma - those were nectar. That is the difference. And if wealth is earned unrighteously, by exploiting others, you will never have even a moment of peace. Impossible! The world may see you live in palaces, in mansions, yet a saint will see how inwardly impoverished you are. Outward display may deceive, but true joy, peace, and fulfillment will never be yours. But if wealth is earned righteously, in Dharma, then it brings welfare to you and to others as well. Kabir Ji says in another couplet: “Jo jal baadhe naav mein, ghar mein baadhe daam. Dono haath uchiye, yahi sayano kaam.” If you are traveling in a boat, and a hole is formed in it, water will enter in. Right? If you do not plug that hole, you do not fix it, and water keeps filling in, then eventually it will sink. So, a wise person sees excessive wealth in life as a boat with a hole, through which water is filling in. Quickly toss the accumulated water back into river or sea. To reach first. Similarly, if excessive wealth comes, quickly give to charity, and become empty. There lies joy, peace, contentment. And the nishkama karma Baba spoke of - same as Kabir Ji. But we humans are never content with what we receive. We always want more. Those who have it - ask them, they are restless, consumed with anxiety. Yet we still want to earn money, and chase the same illusions. We crave to obtain what we lack. And Sadguru says, those who have - first squander, empty yourself. Such a big difference. Totally opposite. 'dhan ka bistar mil jaaye par neend ko tarase nain, kaanton par so kar bhi aaye kisi ke dil ko chain,' Meaning, if you walk the path of honesty, righteousness, knowing Sadguru's heart, and acting accordingly, definitely for a time it's a thorny journey, but the serenity, peace, bliss in it - you can't even imagine. And in the fourth stanza, it is said: 'Sagar se bhi bujh na paaye kabhi kisi ki pyaas, kabhi ye ek hi boond mein ho jaati hai poori aas,' What a line. If you amass millions in wealth, ocean-like happiness comes in life, still those happinesses bring two ailments. Suppose immense happinesses come - though they don't, but imagine. You can be happy imagining too. Suppose immense happinesses arrived, but they bring two diseases. One is that, you start craving for more than received. This heart wants more. And more. Fine, and if you don't get it, that plunges into depression. Into anxiety and stress. So, in both the cases, it devours you. Thus, even oceans don't quench thirst - rather ignite it more. If you are earning 1 crore a month, you want to earn 2 crores. If you have three-bedroom flat, you now want a bungalow. If you have an ordinary four-wheeler, then you want a bigger vehicle. This heart wants more, and that dissatisfaction devours. But can't escape that mirage. Can't escape. 'Sagar se bhi bujh na paaye kabhi kisi ki pyaas, kabhi ye ek hi boond mein ho jaati hai poori aas,' But if Sadguru pours one drop of dispassion into our heart, the thirst quenches forever. A drop of dispassion. That is the glory of dispassion. Among God's six qualities, dispassion is one. God is so complete because He sits at the pinnacle of dispassion. Even if you acquire oceans of property, fame, wealth, every worldly thing esteemed highly still you will remain unfulfilled. Contentment won't descend into life. 'Sagar se bhi bujh na paaye kabhi kisi ki pyaas, kabhi ye ek hi boond mein ho jaati hai poori aas,' But sometimes, just one drop quenches lifetimes' thirst. And that is the drop of dispassion. Detachment. Dispassion So, yearn for that dispassion. Ask Baba for it. If Sadguru has truly entered our life, and if you are truly awakened, ask for dispassion. Don't ask for something transient. Even if you achieve ocean-like success, the dissatisfaction remains. No contentment. Next to impossible. But we crave for what other have. \"When will we become like that?\" Those people are actually dying. You can't see their death. And you want to be like that. An ordinary person can't understand - What is the joy in dispassion? Problem is that. Only a saint or Sadguru knows what dispassion's joy is. Like an impotent person can't enjoy even the most beautiful woman. Can't relish because impotent. Similarly, a worldly person can't know dispassion's joy. Only a saint knows. I'm saying such bitter truth. What that joy is - only a saint knows. Only Sadguru knows what dispassion's joy is. What joy lies in being desireless. Once at least, attain that state. 'Sagar se bhi bujh na paaye kabhi kisi ki pyaas, kabhi ye ek hi boond mein ho jaati hai poori aas,' But sometimes dispassion's one drop descends into heart. And fills permanently with joy, peace, contentment, bliss. That one drop of dispassion. What ocean couldn't, one drop did. Fine? And this last stanza. 'mandir masjid me jaakar bhi kabhi na aaye gyaan, kabhi mile mitti se moti patthar se bhagavaan,' What a line. Even if you keep chanting \"Baba Baba\" for your entire life, but do not give up on selfish desires, You won't get Him. Baba sees: if I keep fulfilling this one's desires lifelong, he'll come asking again. Baba gets weary. He says: \"Now, its enough I have given you a lot. Now I'll start cleansing you.\" \"I don't need your worship, this nonsense that you do with desires, servitude before me - I want that worship to stop.\" \"I'll give you so much trouble that you won't be able to worship me.\" And sometimes Baba gives such strict discipline. If compassion awakens for that person, and after cleansing him for a long time, he changes in such a way, that Baba gets to see the devotee that He wanted to. Thus, it is said over here, 'mandir masjid me jaakar bhi kabhi na aaye gyaan,' 24 hours, I'm saying. Sai Satcharitra says this, and that. Everyone listens to it, but there is no benefit, because desires don't drop. Then Baba thinks: “Enough! By entertaining his sentiments I have only made a fool out of him. Now I must take him directly into My hands.” He then starts to cleanse. He begins to pile problem upon problem, At that time, the devotee cannot understand what is happening. But a day comes, when Baba finally lifts him out - that is dangling him upside down in the well. When brought out, asks: how was it? The devotee says: \"The bliss I experience, I'm a fool, can't describe. Baba takes him to that state. And Baba has no other way because your demands won't lessen. Baba has only one method - He takes us into His hands, and begins polishing us. That is why it is said: 'mandir masjid me jaakar bhi kabhi na aaye gyaan,' No, knowledge does not come that way. Yes, you may read the Sai Satcharitra, this leela, that leela - its depth, its meaning. “Baba said do this, Baba said don’t do that.” But no one truly listens. So Baba says: “Alright, then. I will take this case into My hands. This one is complicated. I must polish him Myself.” And then He fills our life with thorns and pebbles, until we are purified. And after this, we become capable of truly hearing His words. It's bitter truth. But what lies ahead in your life - you must understand. what is wrong in that? It is always for your good. Transient will perish, eternal will be gained. What's wrong? Whatever falls is transient: body-ego falls after troubles, but eternal soul rises. 'mandir masjid me jaakar bhi kabhi na aaye gyaan, kabhi mile mitti se moti patthar se bhagavaan,' These “dust and stones” are the struggles of life - the difficulties that force us to lose, trample us in dirt - after that, true devotion to Baba reveals. It descends in life. There is a couplet by Kabir Ji: 'Sara sura bahu mila.' I have seen many - many who go to temples, perform rituals, sing aartis. 'Sara sura bahu mila, Ghayal mila na koyi' 'Ghayal ko ghayal mile, Ram bhakti dhrud hoye' What a couplet. I have seen many who live with selfish devotion, who boast of their success, who enjoy life. I have met countless such people. But I have not found a single one who has been truly wounded - wounded by the blows of life. 'Ghayal ko ghayal mile, Ram bhakti dhrud hoye' When two such wounded ones meet, they share their experience: “Yes, I too endured twelve years of trials, I too was struck down many times. But only after that did true light enter my life.” \"So, whatever Baba does, is for the good.\" And when another person affirms this truth, your faith becomes unshakable. 'Sara sura bahu mila, Ghayal mila na koyi, Ghayal ko ghayal mile, Ram bhakti dhrud hoye' Devotion to the Lord, that was shaken becomes firm again. After so many blows. Without blows, devotion never becomes steadfast. The person must be trampled into the soil. Another doha of Kabir says: 'Harijan toh haara bhala, Jeetan de sansaar, Haare toh Hari se mile, Jeete yam ke dwar' It is better that you remain defeated, remain in struggles. It is better that your desires are not fulfilled. Only then will you turn fully towards Baba, towards unwavering devotion. For if all your wishes were fulfilled, why would you ever draw near to Baba? Why would the yearning to know His heart ever awaken in you? If every small or large wish were granted, you would remain absorbed only in pleasures, in worldly indulgence. You would never seek Baba’s deeper devotion. Kabir Ji says: 'Harijan toh haara bhala' Better to remain defeated always. Let the world win its fleeting battles.- 'Jeetan de sansaar,' For one who loses, meets God.- 'Haare toh Hari se mile,' But the one who wins, they win this transient world, and go to Yama's door. They attain death. They don't attain immortal soul. So, these blows take you to immortal soul. 'kabhi mile mitti se moti patthar se bhagavaan,' If He tramples us in dust with His hands, eternal will be gained. But if He starts fulfilling our transient desires, then I say, He is not a Sadguru. If He starts to fulfill every legitimate and illegitimate demand of mine, then He is not a Sadguru. But He never does that. Instead, He shatters our desires. He takes our case into His own hands. And scrubs, to purify, and one day places eternal in our hands. Such is His immense compassion. That is why we call Him Sadguru. In the end, I will conclude with a quote I have written: Neither did I learn solely from temples and mosques, Neither did I learn solely from temples and mosques, Nor solely from the pilgrimages of Kashi or Kaaba. Neither from scriptures - be it Pothi, Purana, or Quran, Nor from any Guru, saint, or spiritual master alone. Neither did I learn solely from temples and mosques, Nor solely from the pilgrimages of Kashi or Kaaba. Neither from scriptures—be it Pothi, Purana, or Quran, Nor from any Guru, saint, or spiritual master alone. O unfaithful cosmos, Speaking to the cosmos. O unfaithful cosmos, If I have truly learned anything, it is only because of the blows you dealt me. I hope you understand now, what was meant. So, this is the depth of the song: 'Ek jholi mein phool bhare hai, ek jholi mein kante..' O Mind-Enchanting One, Remover of Curses and Suffering, Destroyer of Ignorance, Bestower of Liberation, The Supreme Giver of Auspiciousness, Embodiment of Truth, Consciousness, and Bliss, the Sacred Mother of countless embodiments of Sai. the True Form of Sai Himself Victory to the Divine Scripture: Shri Sai Satcharita.",
    "Description": "This is a profound spiritual journey that beautifully presents the ups and downs of life, the mystery of karma, and the priceless wisdom of saints. “One bag filled with flowers, another with thorns”—this is the true picture of human life. From the deep couplets of Saint Kabir to the divine songs of Saint Meera, from the soulful Abhangs of Vitthala to the sorrowful life of Lord Shri Ram, every moment reveals the inevitable truths of existence and the soul’s eternal journey. \n\nThis narration is not just about imparting knowledge, but about making us realize why every path in life demands tests, why destiny is shaped beforehand, and why wealth, pleasures, and worldly gains can never quench the thirst of the soul. It weaves together the saints’ profound interpretations, the true bliss of detachment, and the unseen flow of karma into simple yet deeply moving words. \n\nAmidst this world crushed by the grinding wheel of time, Krishnaji’s words remind us that true wisdom is not found in temples or mosques—but in the purity of the heart and surrender to the Divine. This experience is not just for listening; it is one that stirs the very soul. \n\nThis video is not merely to be heard—it awakens the dormant truth within the soul and has the power to change the very direction of life. \n\n--------------------\n0:00 Introduction \n2:49 संत कबीर दोहा ( चलती चक्की देख के )\n9:05 तीर्थक्षेत्र जानेवाले भक्तों का अपघात क्यो होते है ?\n14:02 विठ्ठला तू वेडा कुंभार (मराठी अभंग)\n20:33 करम की गति न्यारी संतो ( संत मीराबाई ) गीत का भावार्थ\n26:53 प्रभू श्रीराम का जीवन दुःख भरा क्यो था ?\n28:34 प्रथम चरण (पहले बनती है तकदीरे)\n35:34 संत कबीर दोहा (दिल का मरहम ना मिला)\n38:30 द्वितीय चरण (नाग भी डसले तो मिल जाए किसी को जीवनदान)\n41:30 तृतीय चरण (धनका बिस्तर मिल जाए पर निंद को तरसे नैन\n44:11 संत कबीर दोहा (जो जल बाढे नाँव मे)\n46:26 चतुर्थ चरण (सागरसे भी बुझ ना पाए कभी किसी की प्यास)\n50:00 वैराग्य का सुख क्या है?\n52:09 पंचम चरण ( मंदीर मसजिद पर जाकर भी कभी ना आए ज्ञान )\n56:52 संत कबीर दोहा (सारा सूरा बहु मिला)\n58:17  संत कबीर दोहा ( हरिजन तो हारा भला)\n1:00:27 शायरी (ना मै मंदिर मसजिद से कुछ सिखा)\n----------------------------\n\nयह एक गहन आध्यात्मिक यात्रा है जिसमें जीवन के उतार–चढ़ाव, कर्मों का रहस्य और संतों की अनमोल वाणी को अद्भुत तरीके से प्रस्तुत किया गया है। “एक झोली में फूल भरे हैं, एक झोली में कांटे”—यही तो मानव जीवन का सच्चा चित्र है। संत कबीर के गूढ़ दोहों से लेकर संत मीराबाई के गीतों तक, और विठ्ठल अभंग से लेकर प्रभु श्रीराम के दुखभरे जीवन तक, हर प्रसंग जीवन की अनिवार्य सच्चाई और आत्मा की यात्रा को उजागर करता है। \n\nयह गीत केवल ज्ञान नहीं देता, बल्कि हमें यह समझाता है कि क्यों जीवन के हर मार्ग में परीक्षा देनी पड़ती है, क्यों भाग्य पहले ही बनता है, और क्यों धन, भोग व सांसारिक साधन भी आत्मा की प्यास नहीं बुझा सकते। इसमें संतों की गूढ़ व्याख्या, वैराग्य का असली सुख और कर्म की अदृश्य गति को सहज व हृदयस्पर्शी शब्दों में पिरोया गया है। \n\nकाल की चक्की में पिसते इस संसार के बीच, कृष्णाजी की यह वाणी हमें याद दिलाती है कि सच्चा ज्ञान न मंदिर से मिलता है, न मस्जिद से—बल्कि हृदय की पवित्रता और प्रभु की शरण से। यह अनुभव केवल सुनने का नहीं, आत्मा को झकझोरने वाला है। \n\nयह वाणी केवल सुनने के लिए नहीं, बल्कि आत्मा के भीतर सोए सत्य को जगाने और जीवन की दिशा बदलने के लिए है। \n\n\n\nPlease click on this link to watch full video of \"Vithhal tu veda kumbhar\" song's explanation / विठ्ठला तू वेडा कुंभार अभंग का संपूर्ण भावार्थ सुनने के लिए कृपया इस लिंक को दबाईये \n\n   • विठ्ठला तू वेडा कुंभार(भावार्थ)/Vitthala T...   \n\n#saibaba #sants #kabirdoha #meerabai #vitthal #spiritualjourney #karma #vairagya #divinewisdom #krishnaji #sai_leela_rahasya #bhakti #devotion #truth #innerpeace …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "#song, #devotion, spirituality, Saibaba, Krishna Ji, song explanation, ek jholi mai phool bhare hai ek jholi mein kaate, Sai hridgat, sai leela Rahasya",
    "Views": "5,175 views",
    "Likes": "374"
  },
  {
    "Title": "स्तवन मंजरी का परम रहस्य पहली बार",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k52OlCa3nYw&pp=0gcJCSMKAYcqIYzv",
    "Transcript": "These were Baba’s final words — that the longing was so deep, such was the love he had for Stavan Manjari. That’s why I had said — today, I am opening a great secret Come to shirdi and cover Baba’s divine body — from head to toe — with garlands of flowers. This is Stavan Manjari, even just a little of it, brings peace to my heart and soul. That’s why I had asked — let me listen to it. All my life, I kept yearning to give them something divine. But what did they ask for? All my life, I kept pouring the treasure of spirituality into them — and they kept asking only for scraps. I wanted to fill their hearts with pearls — but they kept collecting pebbles and stones. These oil-merchants, these clingy devotees, these selfish people — they never truly understood my emotions. come and make these deaf ones listen to Stavan Manjari. Let each and every ovi (verse) touch their hearts. Let their selfishness fall away. O Lord, first cleanse the filth in my mind — even if no desire of mine is fulfilled. Whoever’s consciousness has reached this point — only such a soul can truly understand the Sainath Stavan Manjari. This is not an ordinary book rather an enlightening heritage His Biography in His own words The topic is: The Importance of Sai Stavan Manjari in Sai Sadhana. What is “Manjari”? It refers to a bouquet of flowers. In a bouquet, many flowers are collected and tied together — that gathered group is called “Manjari”. Before coming to Sai Stavan Manjari, I’ll first take two important verses from Sai Satcharitra. Because only after those two verses, the meaning of Sai Stavan Manjari will open up. Chapter 42, Ovi number 70 and 71 — please listen carefully to what I’m saying, it’s very important. These words will reveal a mystery Ovi no 70 of 42nd chapter of Sai Satcharitra says Masid padli dhasluni, avghe shirdi che teli wani trasvuni sodile maj laguni, jato tethuni mi ata please listen carefully to what I’m saying, it’s very important. These words will reveal the significance of Sai Stavan Manjari. Baba, after taking Samadhi, gives darshan in a dream to Dasganu Maharaj in Pandharpur. It’s early morning, bramha muhrat, when Baba appears in his dream and says The mosque has completely collapsed and been reduced to rubble. It has turned into ruins. All these teli and tambuli people of Shirdi have troubled me so much, beyond limits. They troubled me so much that they nearly killed me. So now I’m leaving from Shirdi These are Baba’s final words — please listen carefully. and further he says - 'mhanuni alo yethvari Therefore I've come till here, Pandharpur “I’m giving you darshan now — I’ve come walking from Shirdi to meet you.” “Cover my physical body with bouquets of flowers from head to toe.” “Just this one wish I have, Das Ganu.” “Fulfill it — come quickly to Shirdi.” “Come to Shirdi and with bouquets of flowers, cover my physical body from head to toe.” Now those who read this may think — was there a shortage of flowers in Shirdi? Not at all That this man will bring from Pandharpur. That’s not possible. So then… cover me from head to toe with bouquets of flowers These traders of Shirdi — these selfish, narrow-minded people — tormented me my entire life. What I wanted to give them, and what they kept asking for “I wanted to fill their lives with the treasure of spirituality — but they kept asking for scraps.” “I wanted to fill their lives with diamonds and pearls — but they collected pebbles and stones.” “These oil-sellers, these sticky devotees, these selfish people — never understood my feelings.” “So Das Ganu, I am leaving Shirdi\" these are Baba's last words filled with pain. “I lived among them all these years.” “I tried to give them spiritual wisdom, divine light — but they remained worthless.” These people kept collecting only pebbles and stones. I wanted to shower them with precious gems. So come and cover my mortal body with flowers — that bouquet is the Stavan Manjari. Remember this — those aren’t physical flowers Baba has nothing to do with the roses on his body. He’s not asking for such superficial gestures But anyone who reads that line would probably think — “Yes, he’s asking to be covered with flowers.” No! What he’s really saying is this: All of Shirdi — these selfish devotees their selfishness has now dried up. They now believe that I am dead. But there is you — just you. Not a single line in this Manjari has come out of your heart with selfish intent. Every word is a true prayer. A selfless prayer. That’s why I want you to come. It was written 33 days ago. It was written on the 9th of September, 1918. And Baba took samadhi next month. On the 15th of October 1918 — exactly 37 days later — Baba took Samadhi. Baba is saying: “What you composed, on the banks of the Narmada, in Omkareshwar… that Stavan Manjari, which you created — now come and recite it to the world for the first time. That’s what it means — to cover my body with bouquets of flowers. that is stavan manjiri Understand this it’s not about actual rose petals. He says: ‘All my life, people only treated me with selfishness. I wanted to give something else.’ Everyone who came to me just kept asking, ‘Give me this, give me that.’ But not one cared to know what I was truly ready to give. I am exhausted. I had had enough of these traders. this is Baba’s voice filled with pain. So, O Das Ganu — come. Come and recite this Stavan Manjari to these deaf people This is my final wish — before you lay my body to rest, let this Stavan echo in their ears. That echo — that vibration — is what it means to cover my body with floral bouquets. That is Sainath-stavan-Manjari. Because this Manjari was completed exactly 37 days before Baba’s Samadhi. And Baba is saying, “Come, bring that hymn you wrote filled with devotion, filled with detachment, filled with divine light. Come, and sing it to these deaf men, these selfish ones.” “May be if one of them truly listens, my soul will find peace. Because I’m tired — tired of fulfilling their endless worldly desires.” \"Let my heart… let my soul… find a moment of peace. Come, and recite that Manjari to me.\" \"That’s why I said — I’m going to reveal a great secret today. This Sainath-Stavan Manjari — Methe Kaka had once requested, 'Please speak something on the Stavan Manjari.' What greater secret can there be than this?\" \"And remember — these are Baba’s final words. His yearning. This reveals how much love Baba had for Stavan manjiri \"Come, and recite it to these ignorant ones. Let every single word touch their hearts. Let their desires fall… Let their selfish devotion collapse Sing this to the traders… Sing this to the clingy devotees. Traders — meaning those who cling for gain. I’ve always said it — sing it to them. This Stavan Manjari was completed on the banks of the Narmada on 9th September 1918. And then, on the 15th of October 1918, Baba took Samadhi. Das Ganu Maharaj was in Pandharpur. And there — Baba appeared in a divine vision, and said: \"Come. Come and sit in front of my mortal body… and recite to the entire world that hymn you wrote \"Maybe… just maybe… if it reaches their hearts, I may return to dust in peace.\" Such was the depth of his longing, Why did Baba love it so much? I cannot take the entire Sainath-Stavan Manjari. But I take some of it — the ovis that stir my soul. This Stavan Manjari is the prayer of a true devotee, One who approaches Baba not with selfish desires, Not someone full of worldly wishes, But one whose heart is ruined by the filth of his own mind — This is the cry of that soul. Sai-na-Stavan Manjari is for the one who looks within and sees his impurities. Just like the verse in the 39th chapter of Sai Satcharitra: \"tadviddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā…\" The one who becomes conscious of his ignorance. Who sees clearly the filth within his mind. Who weeps in front of Baba's court, seeking cleansing, not rewards. That is the kind of prayer StavanManjari is — born from a heart in true repentance. Let me now share a few ovis from the Sai-na-Stavan Manjari. Now, look at the level of repentance a true devotee feels. A true devotee feels ashamed even to ask for any desire. “How can I ask for anything,” he says, “When my heart is so full of filth?” First — cleanse my mind. Even if You don’t fulfill any wish — let me be clean before You. The one whose consciousness has reached this level of surrender, Only that one can truly understand the Stavan Manjari. Those of you listening in Hindi — this Manjari is probably available in Hindi too. Please — include it in your daily spiritual practice. Because it contains the cry of a true devotee’s heart. The thirst of a genuine seeker. Not the cravings of a trader. Not the language of those who are caught in desire. those who speak Hindi. It is available in Hindi — and it must become part of your sadhana. Now let me recite from the 50th to 54th ovi: Even if iron is full of its iron-nature coarse, heavy, impure. The philosopher’s stone (paris) does not see its defects. The moment it touches, it transforms that iron into gold. O Sadguru, I am that iron — Not just iron, but rusted. But You — You are the paris the divine alchemist. If You touch me, I too can become gold. Just once — with compassion — touch me. Make me Your own. O Lord, if You hold us close to Your heart, the dark night of our ignorance will fade away. We shall dwell in bliss, bathed in Your light — and what more could we ever need? I am rusted iron and you are the philosopher's stone. Yes, I am a polluted drain and You are the sacred waters of the Godavari. If You just accept me once, my poison will be washed away. I too will be called pure. Please, with the glance of Your mercy — run to me. Cleanse me. That is this servant’s only prayer. You are the paris. And if the paris fails to transform this piece of iron Then the stain will fall upon Your robe, O Baba I have nothing to lose, Baba — I am already rusted iron. But if You let me stay this way — that stain will fall on You. That is why, O Ocean of Compassion — touch me. Make me like You. Let no stain fall upon Your grace. Let no blemish fall upon Your name. Do not leave this sinner as a sinner. Do not leave this rusted iron as it is — make me divine. O Baba — if You do not transform me. Then stain will fall upon your grace. Then You become tainted, O Lord. And I'll take some more from 83 to 92 Look, I can't take it all because once we took satsang on stavan manjiri we sat at 9 in the night and ended it at 8 in the morning So I can't give that much time now. That’s why I’m selecting a few important ovis (verses).\" In the holy waters of the Godavari, only dirty clothes come to be washed. The pure ones, like saints, remain safely stored in treasure chests. We sinners are like those soiled garments who come to be cleansed in your pure waters. Those who are today revered as saints must have, at some time—if not in this life, then in a previous one—come to your feet for cleansing. That chest, that treasury I refer to — it is none other than Vaikuntha (heaven). Your bank of the Godavari is the bank of unwavering devotion. Jivatma is the cloth and impurities are the six vices — lust, anger, greed, attachment, pride, and jealousy. Just the vision of your feet is equivalent to bathing in the Godavari. Please cleanse the impurity of my many lifetimes and make me pure. We worldly beings, caught in illusion, trapped in desires become tainted every moment by these desires. more are the desires fulfilled more we get tainted And so, only we are truly worthy of being cleansed in your sacred waters Lift us who lie at your feet, and embrace us to your heart. If I fail to be cleansed, the stain will fall upon your robe You are like a dense, shady tree, and I am a traveler scorched by the threefold afflictions. and I have suffered these adversities that there's no limit to it and you are a dense tree giving shadow Let me find refuge in your shade, and may my suffering be soothed. You are famous throughout the universe for your graceful shadow May your merciful shade forever remain over my head giving me freedom from sufferings Even if I am seated beneath your dense, divine shade, even if I've reached Shirdi and yet if my threefold afflictions do not dissolve then who would call you the tree of cooling, compassionate shade? What is the worth of your dense, protective tree then? If my threefold afflictions are not calmed — the ones that burn me constantly and if even your divine shade does not bring me cooling relief — then what is the point? And without your compassion, without your grace who in this world can escape the burning heat of delusion-born ignorance? Arjuna had the Lord Himself, the one who rests on Sheshnag — Shri Krishna nd now, it is you who has come into my hands, my Master! Do not look at my faults, do not gaze at the dirt of my mind remember your greatness you are the one who showers mercy without reason. O Baba, I have only one prayer no other wish but wash off the impurities of my mind not to pass an exam, nor to get married, nor to have children. I have come to your feet with only one plea purify my heart, wash away the impurities of my mind This, sainath stavan manjiri, is a prayer. That’s why Baba had said — go and sing Stavan Manjiri to these deaf not just throw flowers on me. He said, 'Sing Stavan Manjiri! Let the deafs hear it — and as you sing it, let it possess you. Let it move you so deeply that you dance with divine ecstasy. I believe, for the very first time, today you may have understood — what Stavan Manjiri truly is. I will two more verses. Each verse, every word, is priceless. I did not have the time to go through all, which is why I brought just a few before you. verse 7 and 8 through which Das Ganu Maharaj says, Those who only possess bookish knowledge, who go on reciting words without true experience or inner purification For such people, in a tone of irony, Das Ganu Maharaj says: They never truly realize You. That’s what I’ll call you — the one who sends people in endless cycles, the spinner of illusions! You never knock at the door of their hearts. They just go on talking — endlessly. Let such fools keep arguing over words A person without real experience should not open their mouth — this is what it teaches us. Without personal spiritual experience, one should not speak. Das Ganu Maharaj says: “Only a saint can truly know You. All others remain blocked and incapable.” They are not worthy of understanding You, O Chakrapani, O Sai Maharaj. To You, I offer my full prostration with body, speech, and mind. And in Ovi 77, Das Ganu says something beautiful: Hiranyakashipu and Ravan were killed by the Divine due to their hatred for God. But never in history has a saint killed anyone. Why? Because saints don’t kill people — they destroy the vices within people. Saints don't attack individuals; they eliminate the darkness in them. Demons or a person with vile qualities were killed for their hatred towards God Not a single saint has ever killed anyone. It’s not like demons didn’t appear before saints — perhaps millions of them stood face-to-face. But the saints struck at their vices, not the person. but instead transformed the demonic into the divine. They turned beasts into beings — raised the fallen to great spiritual heights. And so, Das Ganu Maharaj declares: \"In my eyes, saints are even greater than God.\" This is what Das Ganu’s Stavan Manjiri is about. Today, some people say: \"Sai Baba may be a saint, but not God.\" If only these lines could reach them maybe they would understand. My favorite verse and i beseech Baba with Humility I am lowly, wretched, ignorant — the crown jewel among sinners. Though I am full of arrogance and evil traits, still — please do not reject me. You see this line that was just spoken — it’s another gem from Sai Stavan Manjari. It slipped past me earlier. And there are many such gems within it! That’s why I sincerely urge you — please read this work fully. Baba has left his mortal body now. The discussion is going on whether to cremate him or entomb him — people are debating about his final rites. And in the middle of that turmoil, Baba himself appears before Das Ganu Maharaj in Pundalpur and says: I am fed up with the selfishness of the people in Shirdi. Come here — and sing aloud the prayer you wrote 33 days ago sitting on the banks of the Narmada Sing it with such an open heart that it shakes the selfishness and narrow-mindedness out of the hearts of those people. Sing it so that they might, finally, come to know my true heart.\" \"This is Stavan Manjari — a prayer spoken with yearning, pain, and love.\" I hope today, you have seen Sai Stavan Manjari in a completely new light.",
    "Description": "“True Stavan Manjiri is not what is sung by the lips, but what is lived as life itself.\"\n\n\nWhat Is the Real Stavan Manjiri?  \nKrishnaji on Das Ganu Maharaj’s Hidden Essence\n\nIn this profound discourse, Krishnaji unveils the deeper meaning of Stavan Manjiri composed by Das Ganu Maharaj. Beyond poetic praise, he reveals that true stavan is not merely sung—it is lived through virtue, compassion, humility, and surrender.\n\nDrawing from Sai Baba’s grace, Krishnaji shows how praise matures into manasik puja, purification of mind, and steady remembrance of the Divine. The real Stavan Manjiri is the transformation of the heart, where every thought, word, and action becomes a garland at the Lord’s feet.\n\nFor seekers of Sai Baba’s path and lovers of devotional poetry, this talk is a guide from outer recitation to inner realization.\n\n\n\n\n\n\"सच्चा स्तवन मंजरी वह नहीं जो होंटो से गाया जाए, बल्कि वह है जो जीवन बनकर जिया जाए।\"\n\n\nसच्चा ‘स्तवन मंजरी’ क्या है? \nदास गनू महाराज की रचना का वास्तविक रहस्य – कृष्णाजी के शब्दों में\n\nइस गहन प्रवचन में कृष्णाजी, दासगणू महाराज द्वारा रचित स्तवन मंजरी का गूढ़ अर्थ उजागर करते हैं। वे बताते हैं कि सच्चा स्तवन केवल गाया नहीं जाता, बल्कि उसे जिया जाता है—सद्गुण, करुणा, विनम्रता और पूर्ण समर्पण के साथ।\n\nसाई बाबा की कृपा के आलोक में, कृष्णाजी समझाते हैं कि कैसे स्तवन क्रमशः मानसिक पूजा, चित्तशुद्धि, और ईश्वर का अखंड स्मरण बन जाता है। वास्तविक स्तवन मंजिरी हृदय का रूपांतरण है—जहाँ प्रत्येक विचार, वचन और कर्म भगवान के चरणों में अर्पित माला बन जाता है।\n\nसाई मार्ग के साधकों और भक्ति काव्य के प्रेमियों के लिए यह प्रवचन, बाहरी पाठ से आंतरिक अनुभूति की ओर एक सशक्त मार्गदर्शक है। …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "19,208 views",
    "Likes": "1,251"
  },
  {
    "Title": "How can we make ourselves indebted to Sai?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y-loOLqzjJ4",
    "Transcript": "Who is a greater merchant than Baba? One who takes the fake and gives the real. We give them fake, we give them rupees, and in return, they slowly fill us with jewels. We give them the perishable, and in return, He gives us the eternal. So Baba says, perhaps you cannot perform that level of worship. Baba says, perhaps the nine forms of devotion are not possible for you. Baba says, perhaps Karma Yoga, Bhakti Yoga, Jnana Yoga, or Dhyana Yoga are not possible for you. No matter, it’s okay if none of these are possible, but at least when you prepare food, three or four times, before eating, take out a few morsels and offer them in my name to a cow, a dog, or someone else. Just do this much, and I will be bound by your debt, and that debt I can only repay when I uplift you. That debt will remain until I uplift you; otherwise, the pieces of bread that Baija Maa gave, that debt Baba always remembered in his life. In the end, offer our life’s sacrifice. But. saved Tatya patil's life This is no ordinary book. It’s a divine teaching, his autobiography, in his own words. Om Sai Ram How to make Sai himself indebted to us? One leela (divine story), comes from chapter 29, Captain Hate, one day Captain Hart is in Gwalior. He sees a dream where Baba is standing before him. Upon seeing Baba, he falls at Baba’s feet, and Baba says to him, “Why did you forget?” Look, the question is very important. Baba is asking Captain Hate, “Why did you forget?” So Captain Hate, as soon as the question is asked, falls at his feet and says, “Baba, if a child forgets his mother, how will he survive?” Then they leave from there. They buys Valpapdi, meaning beans, He goes to the garden and pick those beans, the vegetable that grows like a money plant. Once it grows, it spreads. From there, they pick the pods and also keep some money, ten rupees, and rice, ghee, lentils, raw grains, what we call provisions, and sends it to Shirdi. This story seems very simple to look at. means that there are some people, like us, who worship Baba for a short time, but then forget him for a long time. This story is for such people. Baba says that your bond of debt toward me is not strong enough, which is why you easily forget me. So Baba asks for raw grains, saying, “Give me provisions.” So the beans, raw grains, and ten rupees, they keep and sell in Shirdi. Baba says, even if you don’t perform the nine forms of devotion or anything else, it’s okay. But the food you make three times a day at home, before eating, if you set aside a morsel in my name and feed it to the world, I will be forever indebted to you. And even if you forget me, I won’t let you forget me. This story explains that. Please listen to this story carefully; this leela is not ordinary. It’s for beginners. Baba says, perhaps you cannot perform that level of worship. Baba says, perhaps the nine forms of devotion are not possible for you. Baba says, perhaps Karma Yoga, Bhakti Yoga, Jnana Yoga, or Dhyana Yoga are not possible for you. No matter, it’s okay if none of these are possible, but at least the food you make three or four times, before eating, take out a few morsels and offer them in my name to a cow, a dog, or someone else. Just do this much, and I will be bound by your debt, and that debt I can only repay when I uplift you. That debt will remain until I uplift you. Wonderful Leela That’s why the topic is: How to make Sai indebted to you. So, at the minimum in your life, whether you do anything else or not, whether you worship or not, every housewife should do this at the minimum level. Baba says, if you feed me like this, I will be bound by your debt, and I can only be free from that debt when I uplift you and take your soul to the divine. If they give such a great promise for such a small service, Baba takes a huge responsibility upon himself. So, please remember from today onwards, no matter what happens, after preparing food, we won’t eat at home without offering it to Baba. And this way, we will bind Baba in our debt. For example, I’ll give you the best example. Baija Maa, when Baba wasn’t so famous, in those days, Baba stayed in villages very little. He wandered in the forests. In those days, Baija Maa would search for Baba in the forests, crossing thorns and stones, searching where Baba was sitting, while Baba engrossed in meditation and she would feed Baba. And Baba repaid her by giving his life. Meaning, when it was time for Tatya Patil to go, Baba himself went but kept Tatya Patil alive. So, don’t take this leela lightly. The pieces of bread that Baija Maa gave, Baba always remembered that debt in his life. In the end, he sacrificed his life, but saved Tatya Patil. So, giving food to Baba is truly not a small thing. With good intentions, at the minimum level, every Sai devotee should definitely do this. Baba says, I get bound by your debt, and then I start worrying about you. Then, gradually, step by step, I can take you to progressive stages. That’s my responsibility, but at the minimum level, do this much. Sir, another incident comes to mind about offering to Baba. I’ll tell you, Hemant Pant’s chaana(grams) leela. In the driver leela, he comes back from somewhere and from his sleeves some grams fall. Baba mocks and says this man doesn’t give food to anyone and eats alone. So Hemadpant, like an ordinary person, says, “Baba, what are you saying? If there’s no one in front of me, So Hemant Kumar, like an ordinary person, says, “Baba, what are you saying? If there’s no one in front of me, “If there’s no one, am I not with you? When it’s time to eat, if you offer it to me, have you remembered me? Are you truly alone?” So remember, whenever you eat, offer it to me, remember me, and then eat. That’s absolutely right, absolutely right. What a great thing, what a great thing. If we do this much, we bind Baba in our debt. And Baba says, you feed my perishable body to keep it alive, but in return, I keep your eternal soul alive forever. That’s a huge promise. So, at the minimum level, do this sincerely. And if one family member forgets, another should remind them. It’s everyone’s responsibility. If you build this habit for two or three years, I guarantee your life will change completely. Try it and see. In a way, Baba takes the perishable and gives the eternal. One leela comes from the ninth chapter. In Tarkad’s house, the son says, “Papa, I’m going to Shirdi, but as always, you’ll offer the naivedya (offering).” But one day, they forget to offer the naivedya. So Baba, in Shirdi, tells Mrs. Tarkad, “As always, naivedya was offered at your house, and I stayed hungry waiting for it. When it didn’t come, I went to your house in Bandra, Bombay. Your doors were closed, but who can stop me? Because the game of debt between you and me is such. The depth of our bond is so great that even though the doors were closed, I entered, but I saw there was no naivedya for me. Baba says, the depth of our bond is so great. So those who always offer food to Baba, it’s a small thing, but a very deep thing. All spiritual practices are on one side, and this is on another. Remember, even if other things are missed, never miss offering a morsel to Baba before putting food in your mouth. Because this one thing makes Baba indebted to us, and Baba says, I will be free from that debt only when I uplift you, taking your soul to the divine. So, no matter what happens, make this a rule in your life: never put anything in your mouth without offering naivedya to Baba. Close your eyes and imagine putting a morsel in Baba’s mouth, and then Baba spits out some, and you mix that leftover with your food and eat it, so that the food becomes sacred for you. Keep this feeling always. It’s a small thing, but the benefits are beyond imagination. Your imagination cannot even reach there. We offer everything we make to Baba daily, but we never give food to others. I’m not saying you should go out and search, but when the opportunity arises, don’t miss it. For example, if an animal comes, or a bird comes, whether we should start offering Baba or we should go out in search of needy to offer with? Every time it’s not possible, I’m not saying go out deliberately and search. But when such an opportunity comes, don’t miss it. If a poor person comes, or someone unexpected, or a guest comes at mealtime, even if you have to stay hungry, let yourself stay hungry, but ensure the guest doesn’t leave hungry. And remember, if you stay hungry one day because a guest came suddenly and there was only enough food for you, and you gave that food to the guest, then know that those who fast on Shivratri, a hundred such fasts pale in comparison. So, have this clarity that no matter what, a guest will not leave my house hungry. These are the basics. But we don’t follow this. We keep strict fasts for Shivratri, but these basics we don’t hold onto. So, I’m not saying go out every day and search, but with ease, when such an opportunity arises, let it be ingrained in our consciousness that I will first satisfy the hunger of the one in front of me, and then put food in my stomach. Because Baba tells Tarkad, always do this throughout your life. In the ninth chapter, she feeds a dog, and Baba says, “I’m very pleased today. I ate to my fill today; my hunger is satisfied, my thirst is quenched, my hunger is gone. Today you fed me to my fill, and always do this: feed the hungry first, and if anything is left, then eat yourself.” This is Baba’s firm promise. So, Baba says, this way you bind me in the bonds of your debt. That’s why Baba asks Captain Hate, “Why did you forget?” He’s saying, if you keep feeding me, offering to me, and make me indebted to you, I won’t let you forget me, even if you try. That’s why I say, whenever you eat, remember me, offer to me mentally. Baba may not be physically present, but mentally offer a morsel to Baba, and imagine Baba eats some and spits out the rest. Mix that leftover in your food and eat it, so it becomes prasad This is a small leela, but its depth is great. And look, if we give bread to Baba in reality, does he really need to eat bread? He is consciousness; he has no body. But for now, we have to offer to him as if he has a body. We give him the perishable; in return, he gives us the eternal. We give him fake rupees, and in return, he fills us with diamonds, pearls, and jewels. So, it’s a strange deal. And who is a greater merchant than Baba, who takes the fake and gives the real? Okay, does anyone have questions related to this topic? when we make something, we take out a portion for prasad. Then we mix it with all the food we eat. Is that wrong? No, absolutely not. It’s perfectly fine. You’ve mixed Baba’s leftovers with everyone’s food. That’s a great thing. You can definitely do that. And always do this, but even if other spiritual practices are possible or not, don’t miss this. Just remember that. It’s not just a story that you don’t progress further. I want you to progress in further practices, but if for some reason that’s not happening, this is compulsory. And for animals like dogs or cows, what’s better? I say, build a habit. For example, on Thursdays, at least go and feed a cow, or after going out, feed the first animal you see. If you keep this intention on Thursdays, it builds that consciousness and habit. If you do it, it’s great. At least once a week. The first bread we make, we set aside for the cow, and the prasad we make, we offer a little to Baba, then mix it with all the food. That’s how we do it. But I’m saying, personally, on Thursdays, go out and feed a cow or a dog, or the first animal you see, even if it’s a pig. It’s Baba himself. This will expand the vastness of our heart. These small things, if we develop them slowly, our vastness will grow. We will see Baba in the universal form, and that’s what Baba wants. How long will you stay limited to the idol? Baba says, I am the universal expanse. Wherever your eyes go, it’s only me. Until we live that vastness, how can we achieve it? Heart-captivating, sin-destroying, ignorance-dispelling, liberation-giving, supremely auspicious. Bestowing true bliss, Mother of innumerable sai, the embodiment of Sai, the divine scripture, Victory to Shri Sai Satcharitra, the divine book.",
    "Description": "🍂 “We gave roti to Baba, He gave us moksha…” | How to make Sai your debtor? | Sai Leela 🍂\nOm Sai Ram 🙏\n\nHave you ever wondered how a simple roti, a morsel, or feeding a hungry animal can make Sai Baba indebted to us?\n\nThis video shares a very precious and transformational true leela —\n\nwhere Baba says:\n\n“If you cannot do anything — not meditation, not devotion, not service…\n\nEven then if you just feed a hungry person in my name before eating,\n\nthen I will become your debtor… and I will not be able to free myself from that debt until I deliver you.”\n\n🌼 Know in this video:\n\nEmotional leela of Sai Baba “Why did you forget?”\n\nThe secret of the food relation between Bayaja Maa and Baba\n\nWho should be given the first bite of roti when it is made at home\n\nThe spiritual significance of feeding a dog, cow or a hungry person\n\nHow offering ‘leftovers’ to Baba becomes food for the soul\n\nAnd how a simple service can become the path to salvation\n\n🪔 This is not just a story — it is a way of life.\n\nIf you want to build a true relationship with Sai Baba, this video will touch your heart.\n\n🍂 \"We offered bread to Baba, and He gave us salvation...\" | How to Make Sai Baba Indebted to You? | Sai Leela 🍂\nOm Sai Ram 🙏\n\nHave you ever thought that offering a simple piece of bread, a small meal, or feeding a hungry animal can make Sai Baba indebted to you?\n\nThis video shares a precious and life-transforming true Leela (divine story) —\nwhere Baba Himself says:\n\n“Even if you can’t do anything — no meditation, no rituals, no spiritual practices…\nbut if you simply offer food to someone in My name before you eat,\nthen I will become your debtor… and I won’t be free of that debt until I uplift your soul.”\n\n🌼 In this video, discover:\nThe emotional Leela of Baba asking “Why did you forget Me?”\nThe deep bond between Baba and Bayaja Maa through food\nWho should receive the first bite of your daily meal?\nThe spiritual power of feeding a dog, cow, or any hungry soul\nHow Baba’s “leftovers” become sacred food for the soul\nAnd how even a simple act of service can become the path to liberation\n🪔This is not just a story — it's a way of life.\nIf you truly wish to build a deeper connection with Sai Baba, this video will touch your heart.\n📌 Watch the full video and experience Sai’s grace.\n\n👍 If you find it meaningful, like, subscribe, and share with others.\n\n🕉 Om Sai Ram\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiLeela #OmSaiRam #SaiSatCharitra #Devotion #SaiMiracles #SaiDevotee #FaithAndPatience\n\nCHAPTERS\n0:44 SaiSatCharitra Chapter 29, Captain Hate Leela\n4:05 Make Sai your debtor\n5:15 Service to Bayaja Maa and debt to Sai Baba\n8:38 Chapter 9, Tarkhad Leela\n14:23 Who is a bigger businessman than Sai?\n15:10 A poignant question from a Sai devotee …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "4,970 views",
    "Likes": "522"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Even those who hate Sai are extremely fortunate.",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MEtvk5bt2VA",
    "Transcript": "Baba used to say only Allah Malik. That's why Baba is a Muslim. Baba just has to be kept tied to one religion. We don’t want to focus on what he used to do. We just want to focus on what he said. These people are not speaking against Baba since today. Even when Baba was alive, all these things would have happened during his lifetime too. So those people who hate Baba are the most fortunate people of Baba. Because they are hating Baba. Not just any ordinary person. [Music] This is not an ordinary book, it is a piece of radiant advice, his autobiography in his own words, Om Sai Ram. See, nowadays we all live in the age of social media, we all know that a a lot of negative propaganda is being done about Baba. We all know that Baba is called Chand Miyan. A lot of nonsense is said about Baba. Baba is not a Sanatani. Baba is not a Hindu. Baba used to eat meat. If he fed meat then how could he be a saint? Baba used to smoke chillum, so how can a saint smoke chillum or consume intoxicants? There are many such questions and Baba used to say, Allah Malik, that is why he is a Muslim. There is no need to respond to them. Let them do what they are doing. Nothing happens from that. But what happens is that those who had faith in Baba, their faith is getting shaken because of these things. And we care about them today. The rest of the new people are doing it. What are those people thinking while doing this? What is their goal behind it, we don't have to get involved with it. Nor do I want to defend Baba. I don't have the guts. Who am I to defend baba? I don't have the guts. But being a Sai devotee, we have a responsibility to convey the truth to those devotees who are in devotion to Baba. But after hearing such things their faith gets shattered. Their faith starts to wobble. So this is an effort for them and it is the responsibility of all of us. is the responsibility of all of us. So today I am presenting that topic to you. Please listen to the topic carefully. Even those who hate Sai are extremely fortunate. Well, why am I saying this? It will open further. Now see, their first question is whether Sai Baba used to eat meat or feed meat to others? Definitely ,Sai Baba used to eat meat and those who were addicted to meat, whom he wanted to draw to his court, whom he wanted to give spiritual light, towards whom Baba had this feeling that this person is trapped in this, if I take him out of this trap then he can understand my heart, so a little bit, that means in the beginning, Baba used to work by getting down to their level, but only this thought is noticed that Baba used to feed meat. But they do not see what the promise he has made. Baba says a word to a yoga practitioner in chapter 23. One should eat onion only if you have the strength to digest it. But we do not want to hear this. We don't want to see what he used to do. We need to see what he said. If in that aspect he used to do a lot of things. he would dismember his body parts and then join it again. He would put his hand in the burning pot and stir the food. But his hand did not burn. So then, he used to do a lot of things. If you see him eating meat then show this too. But what did he say? Baba has emphasised on Eating an Onion. Even an onion ! If you have the strength to digest even one onion, then eat it. If you can control the ill effects arising from it then only you should consume an onion. So how can a Sadguru who can say this about consuming an onion Can permit anyone to eat meat? But he had new devotees who were very Selfish or with desires and did not even know anything about spirituality. When such people came before him, in order to bring them into his court, he fed them meat as per their wish for some time. But as soon as they came to the court, he gave him spiritual light and also liberated them from meat But no, we just don’t want to understand this. We just have to portray to the world that Baba used to eat meat and feed it to others. Baba used to eat meat and feed it to others. Well, why did he eat it? What is his stage? What is our stage? Shall we copy him? If you really want to copy him then have the guts to put your hands in the burning pot and show it. Show me how to dismember your body and then put it back together again. You will not be able to do it. But will eat meat, just because did it too. What is this all about? And the other one, Baba used to say Allah Malik. That's why Baba is a Muslim. Well, people think Baba, has said “Allah Malik” in the entire Sai Satcharitra, He hasn't said anything else. What a dirty and poor logic this is? Baba tells us such an experience that once, my soul was flying away. I was in immense pain As if Baba tells us such an experience that once, my soul was flying away. I was in immense pain As if In just a few moments I am probably going to leave this world. In such a situation, I picked up Vishnu Sahastranaam and placed it on my heart and was relieved back to life. They will not try to emphasise this such a big thing about Vishnu Sahastranaam. the glory of Vishnu Sahasranaam has been sung at such a level that my soul was flying away and I kept that book on my heart and my soul came back to my body. I who was dying have risen. So by saying this, Baba created a wave of Vishnu Sahastranaam in the minds of all the people. People will not say this. But will focus on- “Baba used to say only Allah Malik”. If Baba has said Allah Malik then he also sermoned Mrs Khaparde to keep chanting Raja Ram Raja Ram. For how many people did he appear in the form of Ram For how many people did he appear in the form of Krishna How many had their gurus who had passed away, the gurus who no longer existed Baba has also appeared in their form. But now this will not be talked about. Baba used to say only Allah Malik. That's why Baba is a Muslim. Baba just has to be kept tied to one religion. We have nothing to do with Baba's real form. And Baba used to have Chlim (Smoke). That's why Baba was a drug addict. Hey, only those who have controlled the universal life force(Vishwapran Shakti) have the right to consume that chilim Is this within the power of every human being? The one who converts all the desires of the world into smoke and absorbs it within himself, only he has the strength to Consume the chilim And only that person can free us from all our desires and longings. I am repeating it. Only the one who has the power to convert all the desires of the world into smoke and absorb them within himself has the right to have the chilim. Only he has all the right to have it. It is not within the reach of every individual. But no! Baba is just another drunkard. Does it have any sense of logic? Baba is chandmiya. Now where did you get these from? I have not understood this till date. Chand Patil is mentioned in Sai Satcharitra, But from where did the rest of the concept of baba is Chandmiya arise only God knows but today a lot is said about him and many devotees who were new, today their faith has been shaken, it doesn't matter, it doesn't make any difference and by my saying their faith will be restored, I don't even have to say this because Baba does that work a crore times more powerfully than me and there is no need to defend Baba. I don't have the guts at all. First of all, let me clarify this, but those innocent devotees who don’t have clarity should understand some things. It is just being said with that emotion. Apart from this, We do not have the capability to answer them. What will you answer? The sleeping person can be awakened. Those who are pretending to be asleep cannot be awakened. What will wake them up? These people are not speaking against Baba today. Even when Baba was alive, all these things used to happen during his lifetime too. There are many such stories. Just take Megha's story for instance. When he went to Baba considering him as a Muslim Fakir, then how Baba completely transformed him is fully described in the 28th chapter. Baba gave darshan to many such people, that is those who considered Baba as a Muslim fakir, but he gave them darshan in the form of their gurus. If you are a devotee of Ram, then he appeared in the form of Ram. If he is a devotee of Krishna then he appeared in the form of Krishna. There are countless stories like these in the Sai Satcharitra but they won't emphasize them all. Just to pick up things of your interest and spread propaganda. And this has been going on for years. Doesn't matter. Neither Baba nor his true devotees are affected by this. It only makes a difference to those who have desires. Who is a very selfish devotee and new devotees are affected. Their faith can be shattered, and this is for them. Those who are true devotees will not waver. Even if thousands or crores of such people come, they are not going to move. So now see, Baba always used two words in his life- Teli - Tamboli Those who are reading SaiSatCharitra regularly will remember Teli Tamboli, Baba used these two words often. Even when Baba had left his body on Tuesday 15th October 1918, then on Wednesday morning in Pandharpur, He gave a dream to Dasganu Maharaj that this mosque of mine has collapsed and all the Teli- Vani of Shirdi have troubled me a lot. I have left that Shirdi. you shall come and shower me with flowers This is one such verse that comes in chapter 42. So Baba is saying that I am fed up with these Teli-Tambolis. That's why I have left Shirdi. Well, who is that Teli Tamboli? Teli Tamboli Baba has two types of devotees. A Teli bhakt is one who is clingy. Oil has a property. It sticks. A clingy devotee is one who Does not want to know my heart but wants to gain something from me. He worships me with a selfish motive. His devotion is selfish. That’s a Teli One who wants to stick to me like oil. As soon as he gets his purpose fulfilled he has an exit. But he does not need to stay there. He doesn't want to understand my heart He doesn't want to listen to what I have to say. As soon as his purpose was accomplished, he leaves So this is the 1st kind of devotee. And the other devotee is the one who is Tamboli. Tamboli means one who sells betel leaves in Marathi. we eat after having a meal. The person who sells betel leaves is called Tambuli. So betel leaf has one property. When do we normally chew paan? When we have eaten something with excess oil or ghee, then to clear it, as there is an alkali and a peppery taste in Betel, by chewing it all the oil gets cleaned. So this Tamboli means my haters, Tamboli means those who are attached to me, who love me but do so for their own selfish ends. Tamboli means those who hate me. So, I am fed up with both of them. Baba has spoken about it that time itself. So today those who are hating Baba, are spreading propaganda against Baba. they are spreading wrong propaganda then they are also extremely fortunate in the eyes of Baba. This is such a strange thing, look at The love baba holds, that is why Sai Baba is Sai Baba, So today the gathered crowds do make sense. If there is so much crowd gathering then there is a reason behind it. So those people who are hating Baba are the most fortunate people of Baba. Because they are hating Baba. And not just any ordinary person but Sai Baba himself. those who argue that Sai Baba used to eat meat. Sai Baba used to smoke chillum. Sai Baba used to abuse. Normally an attempt is made to mislead people by putting these questions before the public. So above all this, there is a couplet by Rahim, I am putting forth to you that couplet. Please listen carefully. Rahim ji says that Rahim, one who is of good nature, what can be done by bad company, Sandalwood is not affected by poison if snakes remain wrapped around it, what does it mean, it means that people who are of very high state, who are sitting in the Yoga empire who are called Yoga emperors. You cannot measure their daily routine so lightly that they used to eat meat they used to have chillim. will this dull intellect of yours and mine be able to assess such a high status? So Rahim ji writes this couplet for such people. So Rahim ji says that the one who has the best nature and has conquered Maya and has become of the best nature. Those who have conquered Maya and made their nature the best of the best. What can the bad company do to them in their life? What can the wrong company do? What can this meat do? What can this chillum do? For example, normally if even wet wood falls into a burning furnace, it turns into ashes Similarly, that fire is pushing inside. If anything like meat, fish, or even wet wood like chillim falls into it, it will get burnt to ashes in the fire. So Rahim is saying that people of good nature can have bad company so what effect can these things have on their lives? These bad companies can never affect their life. No doubt he is commenting this as a bad company. But he is still sitting after winning over them. It is as if we have conquered Maya. O Rahim, one with good nature in bad company similarly sandalwood doesn’t get poisonous. Now look at the original sandalwood trees, the poisonous snakes remain wrapped around the sandalwood trees because snakes love the fragrance of that sandalwood so much. But despite clinging to it for 24 hours, snake is unable to release its poison into the sandalwood tree. Sandalwood is sandalwood. It does not allow even a little bit of that poison to absorb inside it. But the poisonous snake is wrapped around 24hrs Despite that sandalwood is ineffective, similarly a perfect Sadguru remains untouched even after doing all these things. So, Rahim ji is saying that sandalwood does not absorb poison, even if it remains wrapped around by a cobra for 24 hours a day, sitting coiled around it, but still it does not have any ill effect on the sandalwood tree, it does not have any negative impact, In the same way, the Sadgurus have to do such tasks due to compulsion, then it does not have any ill effects. On the contrary, by feeding that dirty lust inside the other person a little bit, they eradicate it forever. But no, we do not have to go that deep. We want to see him from the perspective of a common man. But Baba not going to fit your ordinary perspective. Sai Baba will not sit. And see, what I am saying is that even those who hate Sai are extremely fortunate. Well, why am I saying this? Baba himself has answered this. then am I coming to this topic. Baba himself has answered how those who hate Baba are extremely fortunate. So chapter 44 verse number 158- 159 Maybe Baba knew that In future, all these questions will be raised, perhaps Baba already knew that and so he has given the answer, He says that I am not Paras, I am a stone, by believing this, People wanted to prove it. Saying that this man is not paras. But just an ordinary stone. People wanted to prove this. wanted to prove Baba as a stone in front of the public. He is a hypocrite. He is a hypocrite. People wanted to prove this. Some people, like the ones who are doing today, Pandits with bookish knowledge, are defaming Baba by making a lot of noise and many Pandits who dictate what is written in the books about the prohibition which scripture has it been said that eating meat is right, so whatever they say, that means their thinking is to that extent definitely and they are not saying anything wrong. It is correct till there. For a common man that is fine. But those things do not apply to those who are sitting at that higher level of Yoga. As that couplet of Rahim ji proves. So these things do not apply to people like them. Yes, but it is absolutely true for common people like us that we should not eat non-vegetarian food. It has adverse effects on us. There is no doubt in this. But if you want to apply this thing on those who are sitting at the top of such a high Yoga empire, then it is absolutely wrong. These are Baba's words - I am not paras. I am a stone. Some Wanted to prove this to some such people. These defaming people these Pandits So what did they do? They brought iron pillars to hit me to show that I was stone, But not paras, So to prove that I am a stone, they hit me with that iron pillar. But as soon as the strike took place, iron turned into gold. What is the example? That iron became gold and then those who wanted to prove me as stone got ashamed and they had such an experience that they returned in shame. So here is Paras Sai Baba and those who are spreading bad propaganda against Baba. These are iron pillars. So these iron pillars, after hitting the Paras (Gold), after wounding the paras, became gold. Meaning those people who are spreading negative propaganda against Baba today. They are speaking against Baba. they are truly lucky. Because they are going to be converted into gold. It will only be good for them in the future. Therefore, you people should not keep any ill feelings towards them because Baba does not have any ill feelings towards them. There is no wrong feeling. So we Sai devotees should also not have any wrong feelings towards him. Because Baba is saying that I am Paras (Gold). You don't worry. To prove that I am a stone. They bring iron rods and hit me with them. But when in return, it turns into gold upon touching me, then they feel embarrassed and go back. But that iron pillar turned into gold. Therefore, they are extremely fortunate because even if they hate, they are hating Sai Baba. If Baba does not have any bitter feelings towards them then we should not have any bitter feelings towards him. Let them do the rest of their work. But if we can really do something, then we can do one thing we can bring Baba's spiritual wisdom, his spiritual treasure, front of the whole world that is the way to deal with all these things and there is no other way. If you also start hating them in return then what will be the difference between them and you? Baba's spiritual wealth is so deep. There are so many things you can give to the world. If you spread it, if you become capable of giving it to them then their Mouth will shut automatically. But if we are not able to do that then this will continue. If you really want to do something then don't reply to them. You should bring Baba's spiritual wisdom, his spiritual treasure, before the world. big thing Baba has said here. This Fakir is not Paras. This is a stone. To prove this, they bring iron poles and hit the stone. And in return that iron pillar turns into gold. imagine how lucky they are, if you are saying something against Baba and even spreading false propaganda, but they are doing against Baba they will definitely get something, good will happen to them, if they are going to benefit despite doing that work, then why do you have to spoil your fate by hating them, So never have the feeling of hatred towards them, not even in your dreams Leave them to their fate. Yes. But I am requesting again. If you really want to do something then Baba's spiritual treasure the SaiSatcharitra. Baba says this is not a scripture. This is my living physical form. This is my real body. This is what I have placed before you. So why not hold on this one. the idol incarnation of Param Brahma, Baba has said so for this scripture, which means that it is the incarnation of the living Param Brahma. I I left my body, that is, I have been gone for 100 years, but my idol of Param Brahma, which is my incarnation, is still alive. I am alive in this scripture, my will in each and every word of mine and follow it. Baba is saying such a big thing that even if they attack me, they turn into gold. So that is Baba's place. What a high status this is. can imagine how high a status it is. Those who are hating are also rich. And if we are his people then how can we hate them I will not take names today. I was sitting right here. That's why I felt I should take up this topic. I just created this topic this afternoon. uncle is telling me that when I hear this hate I get so angry that I feel as if what should I do or what should I not do. No, it is wrong. That method itself is wrong. Because what Baba is saying saying is that those who are doing this are worthy of respect for me. On the contrary, he is extremely lucky. Because even if they are hating, whom are they hating? They are doing it with an existence like me. Even if you collide with me, you will turn into gold. So if Baba has the intention of making them into gold then how can we hate such people That's why this is the name of the topic. Even the one who hates Sai is extremely fortunate. Baba is like the tree laden with fruits. Even if you throw a stone at it, it will give you fruit in your hand. It will only bear fruit. That is a tree. Even if you throw an iron pillar, it will turn into gold. So those people who hate Baba are really lucky. I mean it is a salt doll, a doll made of salt for instance A salt doll it became arrogant that I will measure the depth of the ocean and went into the ocean to measure it. Will it be able to? This is just a similar act. We will measure the depth of Baba. Will raise questions on Baba's existence. They will just melt away. In fact, if the salt doll tries to measure the depth of the ocean, will it be able to do so? So, their actions are also like that. Leave it, but it is still called the ocean. It cannot measure the depth after entering the ocean, it will still be called the ocean, similarly, those who say bad things about Sai Baba and even those who hate him are extremely Fortunate,if uncle had not said that today, then probably I would not have taken up this topic today, please do not let any feeling of contempt come to your mind about the haters of Baba because what our Baba wants, what our Baba is saying, we have to act accordingly. There is no scope for any negative emotions towards anyone to arise in our mind. I have written a poem on this at the end. I will end this topic by reciting that poetry. Please listen to this poetry carefully. Hey you who hate, what a radiant fate you have meaning what a commendable fate you have. Hey, you who hates, what a radiant fate you have, even though you hate the light, you are facing the light [Praise] Enchantress, remover of curses, destroyer of ignorance, giver of salvation, ultimate benefactor, giver of true bliss, mother of infinite crores of Sainnaths, the real Sai form, Grantharaj Shri Sai Satcharitra Diya Granth ki Jai O",
    "Description": "✨Even His Detractors Are Blessed – Krishnaji on Sai Baba’s Grace Beyond Judgment ✨\nIn this timely and thought-provoking talk, Krishnaji addresses the rising controversies and criticisms surrounding Shirdi Sai Baba in the present day. While some question His life, habits, or even His divinity, Krishnaji reveals how Baba’s actions—whether it was eating non-veg, smoking a chillum, or following His unique daily routine—were never random. They carried deep spiritual meaning, tailored to awaken the hearts of seekers.\nWhy did Baba allow or engage in actions that drew public criticism?\nWho truly has the right over chillum and eating non-veg?\nHow did Baba respond to hatred—not with defense, but with divine grace?                       What should true devotees do in such times?\nKrishnaji explains how Sai Baba’s greatness remains untouched by praise or blame. Even those who rejected Him—intentionally or unknowingly—were still embraced by His compassion. This talk is not about defending Baba, but about understanding His boundless love.\nJoin Krishnaji as he sheds light on how Sai Baba continues to uplift even those who hate Him, and how His silence in the face of hatred becomes the loudest lesson in unconditional love.\nOm Sai Ram\n\n-------------------------\n0:00 Introduction\n1:30 Controversies\n3:26 Desire to Detachment: Sai Baba and Non-Veg\n6:26 Beyond Boundaries: From Allah Malik to Vishnu Sahasranamam\n8:09 Chillum- Mastery over Worldly Desires\n9:03 How Baba answered hatred with Grace?\n11:21 Teli and Tamboli\n14:12 How Sai Baba’s greatness stands untouched?\n19:00 Sai blesses even those who turn away\n25:44 Duty of every Sai devotee\n27:38 Essence of the topic\n30:18 Conclusion\n---------------------------\n\n✨ साई से नफरत करनेवाले भी परम भाग्यशाली – निंदा से परे साईं बाबा की कृपा पर कृष्णाजी का सारगर्भित प्रवचन ✨\nइस समयानुकूल और विचारोत्तेजक प्रवचन में, कृष्णाजी आज के समय में शिर्डी साईं बाबा से जुड़ी बढ़ती हुई आलोचनाओं और विवादों पर प्रकाश डालते हैं। कुछ लोग बाबा के जीवन, उनकी आदतों, यहाँ तक कि उनके दिव्य स्वरूप पर भी प्रश्न उठाते हैं। लेकिन कृष्णाजी बताते हैं कि बाबा की हर क्रिया — चाहे वह मांसाहार करना हो, चिलम पीना हो या उनका विशिष्ट दैनिक जीवनचर्या — कभी भी साधारण या बिना उद्देश्य के नहीं थी। इन सभी में गहन आध्यात्मिक अर्थ निहित थे, जो साधकों के हृदय को जागृत करने के लिए थे।\nबाबा ने ऐसी क्रियाएं क्यों कीं, जो लोगों की आलोचना का कारण बनीं?\nचिलम पीने या मांसाहार करने का अधिकार किसे है?\nबाबा ने घृणा और विरोध का उत्तर कैसे दिया — क्या उन्होंने प्रतिकार किया या करुणा दिखाई?\nऐसे समय में एक सच्चे भक्त को क्या करना चाहिए?\nकृष्णाजी स्पष्ट करते हैं कि साईं बाबा की महिमा प्रशंसा या निंदा से कभी कम नहीं होती। जिन्होंने बाबा को ठुकरा दिया — जानबूझकर या अज्ञानवश — वे भी उनकी करुणा से वंचित नहीं हुए। यह प्रवचन बाबा का बचाव करने के लिए नहीं है, बल्कि उनकी असीम प्रेममयी दृष्टि को समझने के लिए है।\nआइए, इस प्रवचन में कृष्णाजी के साथ उस सच्चाई को जानें कि कैसे साईं बाबा अपने विरोधियों को भी उठाते हैं, और कैसे उनकी मौन सहिष्णुता निःस्वार्थ प्रेम का सबसे बड़ा संदेश बन जाती है।\nॐ साईं राम।\n\n#saibaba  #krishnajtalks #divinegrace #saicontroversies #saibhaktdharma #unshakenfaith #chillumcontroversy #saimiracles #saicompassion #saisatcharitrastories #saileela #saileelarahasya #saibabablessings #saibabateachings #shirdisaibabadevotees #motivation #krishnaji #shirdi #explore …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "3,975 views",
    "Likes": "379"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Mavshi Bai's Nevaskar (Service) / Mavshi Bai or Nevaskar (Seva)",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WLVWAczlfGM",
    "Transcript": "Om Sai Ram, today we will shed light on the story of the quarrel between Mausi Bai (Smt. Venu Bai Kaujalgi) and Anna Sahab Chinchankar, as described in the 24th chapter. One day, Baba was sitting on his seat in Dwarkamai. Anna Sahab Chinchankar was pressing Baba’s right hand, while on the other side, Venu Bai Kaujalgi—whom Baba lovingly called \"Mother\" was rubbing Baba’s stomach. She was massaging his stomach with great force, but Baba did not utter a single word of discomfort. Her way of massaging was so powerful that her whole body swayed back and forth, causing his face to come close to Anna Sahab’s face. At that moment, Mausi Bai jokingly said, \"Why, Anna, are you bringing your face close to mine to take a kiss? Listening to this Anna, quick tempered by nature, got disturbed and said, \"I have grown so old, don't I even have that much sense?\" In no time, the joke turned into a quarrel. But just then, Baba said to Anna, \"Why are you getting angry and tell me, what is wrong in kissing mother? Upon hearing Baba’s words, both of them calmed down, and the quarrel ended right there. One day, the same Mausi Bai was vigorously rubbing Baba’s stomach. Seeing this, a devotee present there, out of concern, said, \"Please massage a little gently, Bai, or else Baba’s stomach might burst.\" Upon hearing this, Baba got angry. He struck his satka (stick) on the ground in rage, stood up in anger, and placed one end of the stick against a pillar of Dwarkamai while pressing the other end against his stomach. He then started pulling the pillar toward him. As he moved closer, the stick seemed to pierce his stomach as if it would tear open. But just then, Baba calmed down and sat back on his seat. Friends, what lesson should we take from these two stories? This is what we will reflect on today. Chapter 24, which you just described, is a very humorous chapter. Baba’s sense of humor and his attitude toward wit Baba sometimes displayed very lighthearted moments, and this story is one of them. Mausi Bai’s story has two aspects—one humorous and the other deeply serious when Baba demonstrates his divine play with the satka. so, first we will talk about it's humorous structure Baba had a nature where he sometimes enjoyed humor and encouraged it. This entire chapter is related to that, but even within humor, there is always a deeper meaning. None of Baba’s leelas (divine plays) were merely for amusement. Even in humor, there was wisdom. In this story, Anna Chinchankar—whom Baba used to call the Narada Muni of Kaliyug As he was good at instigating quarrels among people. It seems as if he is paying the price for it in this chapter. So, Anna Saheb is massaging Baba's left hand, which is placed on the railing. And Venubai, also known as Maushi Bai, was massaging Baba's stomach. And they both moved closer, causing their heads nearly to collide with each other. Just then, in a jesting way, Maushi Bai said, \"Anna are you trying to kiss me?\" Anna was pure-hearted person but also short-tempered he reacts instantly. He immediately said, \"Am I such a fallen man? Am I a fool to take your kiss? You are deliberately creating a scene to argue with me!\" At that moment, Baba intervened between them and compelled the quarrel to end With his divine words, he says, \"Oh Anna, why are you holding on to such a small matter? Why are you getting so angry? What’s wrong with kissing a mother?\" That one sentence pierces Anna Chinchankar's heart, and he immediately calms down. However, through this leela (divine play), one thing becomes clear. Even though this incident appears humorous, Baba is imparting a deeper lesson through it. Do you know when a person becomes irritable? It happens when a certain tendency is already hidden within him. If there is an intensity of desire within me, then even a joke made in a lighthearted manner can affect me deeply. Baba is pointing out that inclination in Anna, as he got so angry at Mausi Bai's words, which were merely a joke—it was because that tendency exists within him. Why does a person get so restless? Tell me—if Mausi Bai had said those words to Anna Chinchankar in a jesting manner, I’m not saying that Anna had any lustful thoughts about Mausi Bai, but desires, from time to time, manifest their influence on our consciousness. That is why, in such moments, even lighthearted remarks can hit hard. Baba was pointing this out—if that inclination did not exist within you, you would have taken the joke as a joke and not become so serious about it. So today, Mausi Bai's words struck your heart, but the fault does not lie with her—it is your own vṛtti (inclination) that is to blame for your anger. This is what Baba wanted to convey. A person is affected by such things only when that inclination already exists within them. If he had truly conquered desire, he would have taken the joke as just a joke, in the same lighthearted manner. They wouldn't have become irritated so quickly, as Anna did in that moment. This was the first aspect of humor in the episode. Now, let’s look at the second aspect—Mausi Bai's service. Mausi Bai was massaging Baba’s stomach but she was doing it with such force that it seemed as if she was pressing his stomach and back together. Seeing this, one of the devotees sitting nearby, concerned, said, 'The way you are pressing Baba’s stomach, be careful! What if his intestines burst out?' The moment Baba heard this, he suddenly sprang up, his face turning red with anger And with great force, Baba struck his satka (wooden staff) on the ground. Then, he pressed one end of the satka against his own stomach and the other end against a pillar, pulling the pillar toward himself. It appeared as if he was trying to push the satka into his own body. The devotees watching were horrified—they felt that in just a few moments, Baba’s stomach might burst open. The gap between Baba and the pillar kept narrowing as he kept pressing the satka deeper into his abdomen. Now, the question arises—Was it necessary for Baba to get so angry? To answer it, we must look at two perspectives— one from the devotees' point of view and the other from Baba’s own standpoint. If we see it from Baba’s perspective, we can clearly witness his compassion and grace in this act. Through this act, Baba was conveying a profound message—if a devotee is serving me, no one has the right to criticize or object. I am capable of accepting their service, Baba himself refers to this in Ovi 140 of the Shri Sai Satcharitra: It is not for others to decide whether that service is right or wrong. Ovi 140 clearly explains that Baba is teaching us an important lesson: If someone is serving him—even if that service is not perfect or necessary—he has the strength to endure and accept it. Then why should others object to it? No one has the right to criticize or question that service. Through this, Baba's immense compassion is evident. He was so merciful that when someone served him, he accepted it as pure service, without judging whether it was right or wrong. This is the lesson he wanted to impart to us. This perspective represents Baba’s viewpoint, which reveals his divine character. His actions in this Leela were meant to demonstrate his unconditional acceptance. So, should all devotees learn from this and serve in the same way? from the devotee's point of view, the equation of this leela (divine play) changes significantly. Chapter 43, where there is an ovi (verse) by Hemadpant: \"Parabrahma Sagunamurti, Daive Asta Ushagati, Kharya Kharyachi hovini, Vismruti, Vinodhi Preeti Dhariyeli.\" What does this ovi convey? It says that the manifest form of the Supreme Brahman (Sagun Brahma) is standing before us in the flesh. \"Daive Asta Ushagati\" means \"He is standing by my bedside,\" showing how close my Baba is to me. But the true service (seva)—the real purpose of being near Baba—is spiritual knowledge (Brahma Gyaan). That is why it says, \"Kharya Kharyachi Hovini Vismruti\", meaning we have forgotten the real purpose. We have never truly remained aware of the actual purpose of life in Baba's presence. Instead, \"Vinodhi Preeti Dariyeli\", we spent our entire lives in a lighthearted, playful manner despite being so close to him. Now, this ovi contrasts with the teaching in Chapter 24 Baba has said that he accepts the service offered by devotees however they choose to serve him. On the other hand, this ovi from chapter 43 reflects deep regret: \"We spent all our time in jest in Dwarkamai, in the presence of Baba and we never truly grasped the purpose of life.\" It expresses the sorrow of having been so close to divinity but never realizing its deeper significance. So, from the devotee's point of view, this ovi holds immense importance. The leela (divine play) mentioned in this chapter is from Baba's perspective. Different viewpoints exist, just as in the Ramayana, we see the example of Shabari. Shabari had been yearning for Lord Ram for countless lifetimes. She spent years preparing for his arrival —spreading flowers along the path he might walk But she was worried: \"What if the berries I offer are sour?\" So, she tasted each one before offering it and bifurcated the sweet ones Unknowingly, she was giving Lord Ram half-eaten berries. Yet, Ram accepted them with immense love, just as Baba accepted Mausibai’s service with affection. It his greatness and compassion. But, if we look at this story from devotee's point of view then there are 2 verses from the same chapter which will clarify it. ovi 110 and 111 of the same chapter: \"Saiche hi nishkapata prema, Devuni gheti seva anuttama, Sai accepts even imperfect service (anuttama seva) when given with pure, selfless love. Ki te nijasmaran avishram, ghado ho kshem bhaktasa.\" Let the devotees remain absorbed in Baba's remembrance is the mere goal behind that service. Even if her service is imperfect, at least she are doing it with me in her heart. her love is pure and unwavering. service that was not perfect and He is ready to endure such service for pure love In ovi 111, it is said: \"Aapuli tapascharyati kiti, jine ladhavi sant sangati, What great spiritual efforts have we made to deserve such close association with a saint like Sai Baba? And then: \"Phari Saiche deen vatsal, nishchiti upekshi na bhaktate.\" \"Sai is compassionate toward all devotees and never neglects anyone, regardless of their nature.\" This clarifies Baba’s perspective on such devotees. Now, coming back to your question: Should we take this as a lesson that we can serve Baba however we like? One of Baba’s 11 promises states: \"Jaisa bhav, tyaisa anubhav.\" (\"As is your faith, so shall be your experience.\") If a devotee serves in any manner, Baba does not stop them. In fact, Baba even demonstrated in his leelas that he would go to great lengths to protect a devotee’s faith, as seen in the story of Satka. However, if we compare Mausibai’s service with another devotee’s service from Chapter 35—Balaram Patil Nivaskar Balaram Patil used to sweep the paths Baba walked, ensuring that no thorns or pebbles would hurt Baba’s feet. Now, what we should take from this is up to us. If we keep Balaram Patil Nevaskar’s devotion in mind, we may choose to serve like him, or we may choose to serve like Mausi Bai, massaging Baba’s stomach in devotion. Each devotee must decide for oneself. In the 13th chapter, in the Kshetra-Kshetragna Vibhag Yoga, Sant Dnyaneshwar Maharaj speaks about his devotion to his Guru. He says, Do you know how I serve my Guru, Nivriitinath. If my Guru walks barefoot, I will become his sandals. If the scorching sun troubles him, I will become an umbrella to shield him. If he wishes to sleep, I will become a soft, velvety bed. I will turn into fragrant breezes and wave before him. I will transform into nature itself, solely for my Guru’s service.\" This too is a form of service. So the question arises—what kind of service should we offer? In this chapter, Mausi Bai’s service is indeed excessive—there is no doubt about it. However, from Baba’s perspective, his compassion knows no bounds. The leela (divine play) of the satka (stick) in this chapter reveals this. If we focus on the phrase \"अनुत्तम सेवा\" a new dimension emerges. It seems as if Baba is using this leela to tell us that many devotees come to his court who are not completely pure or sattvic. They come with difficulty, and only manage to hear a few words of divine wisdom. If such people offer service with a slightly tamasic inclination, it is still acceptable— because at least they have come to Baba’s presence. Through this, they get to hear even a few words of knowledge and light. This gives them a chance for transformation So Baba’s message is: do not reject or discourage such people. Another, perspective on the phrase \"अनुत्तम सेवा\" is that some devotees are like lifeless pillars—they are deeply ignorant and lack awareness. In order to awaken them and fill them with consciousness, Baba has to endure great suffering. Only through his pain can he bring light into such beings. so, you are being roadblock in my work is what he is saying to the devotee To pour the light of wisdom into such ignorant devotees, I must endure suffering; to fill a lifeless being with knowledge, devotion, and detachment, I must bear pain. From Baba’s viewpoint, his compassion is limitless. From the devotee’s perspective, one must endure pain to fill a lifeless being with knowledge and detachment, so don't hinder me is what indirectly Baba wants to say.",
    "Description": "Shri Sai Satcharita – Chapter 24 | Mavshi Bai Ki Nevasakar (Sewa) | Baba’s Divine Play and Spiritual Wisdom\n\nIn this chapter, we delve deep into Shri Sai Baba’s sense of humour and the profound spiritual teachings he imparts through the story of Mrs. Venubai Kaujalgi and Annasaheb Chinchanikar.\n\nThis video explains how Baba’s humour teaches us important secrets of life and inspires us towards enlightenment.\n\nHighlights of this episode:\n\nBaba’s sense of humour and his way of understanding human nature.\n\nThe profound spiritual teachings hidden within humour.\n\nWhy Baba called Annasaheb Chinchanikar the ‘Narad Muni of Kalyug’.\n\nBaba’s divine analysis of the impact of human irritability and passion.\n\nHow the outer smile hides the inner passions and emotions.\n\nSpiritual Insight Spiritual Insight:\nBaba’s playful humor is not mere entertainment; it is a divine medium to reveal the subtle truths of human nature and the soul's journey. Through light-hearted interactions, Baba teaches us to observe our inner states — the agitation, desires, and true intentions — with awareness and compassion.\nThis chapter is a beautiful reminder that spirituality is not just solemnity but can be embraced with joy, humor, and profound love.\n\n▪ Dive deep into Baba’s Leelas and discover the silent wisdom hidden within His playful acts.\n▪ Deep learning of Baba's humor and service on the path of spirituality.\n\nWatch to awaken your inner understanding and connect with Baba’s timeless teachings!\nSubscribe for more soulful insights from Shri Sai Satcharitra.\n\n\nSubscribe and experience the timeless wisdom of Shri Sai Satcharitra.#explore #motivation #trending #fyp #reels #youtubeshorts #youtube #youtuber #instagram#shirdi #shortvideo #shortsfeed #viralshorts #shorts #shortsviral #omsairam \n,\n[Saibaba, religion, teaching, spritual, reels, knowledge, educational, temples, quotes, saisatcharitra]#explore #saibaba #trending #fyp #shraddha #instagram #saidarshan #reels #reelsinstagram …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "2,587 views",
    "Likes": "191"
  },
  {
    "Title": "मेघा त्रिशुळ शिवलिंग रहस्य",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VDvarkRX8CE",
    "Transcript": "Om Sai Ram, In the 28th chapter of Sai Satcharitra, there is a beautiful story about the Shivling and Trishul. Today, we will discuss this story in depth. Baba had a devotee named Megha, who was a staunch devotee of Lord Shiva. Another Sai devotee, Nana Saheb Chandorkar, gave Megha a picture of Baba, which Megha worshipped day and night. In this way, Megha worshiped picture at home and Sai Baba in Dwarkamai One day, Megha had a divine vision in which Baba appeared and scattered sacred rice grains over his bed. Baba instructed Megha to draw a Trishul (trident). Megha suddenly woke up and was astonished to see that the rice grains were indeed there, just as they had appeared in his vision. But the door to his room was closed. How could Baba have entered? Megha immediately rushed to Dwarkamai and asked Baba about it, “Baba, you came to my house, but the door was closed!” Baba instructed Megha to go back home and draw the Trishul at his home. The next day, a Ramdas devotee arrived in Shirdi and offered a Shivling to Baba, who then handed it over to Megha. So, dear Sai devotees, Megha was first instructed to draw a Trishul, and the very next day, he received a Shivling. What is the deeper meaning of this? Let’s reflect on it today. Om Sai Ram! Om Sai Ram, 28th chapter of Sai satcharitra depicts a beautiful story about Shivling and Trishul that it goes like this - Megha, one of the ardent devotees of Baba, had an image of Baba given by another Sai devotee, Nana saheb chandorkar and Megha worshiped that picture regularly with discipline. One morning Megha had a vision of Baba instructing him to draw a trishul and bestowing rice grains over his bed and Megha worshiped that picture regularly with discipline. One morning Megha had a vision of Baba instructing him to draw a trishul and bestowing rice grains over his bed and with this megha wakes up and finds rice grains scattered over his bed. Evidently, he ensures Baba's coming But he was in a dilemma upon finding that the door was closed. and on the next days, goes to the mosque to meet Baba and asks, \"Baba, yesterday i had a vision.\"\\ just then Baba says, \" Don't talk about the dream but tell me if you have drawn trishul as i instructed you.\" Over which megha says, \"Actually, Baba, I didn’t understand this—I saw the Akshata, but I couldn’t figure out where you came from because the wada’s door was closed.\" Baba then explained, “I am the master of all. I exist everywhere. I have no fixed form or boundary. I don’t need a door to enter. I can come from anywhere.” Following Baba’s instructions, Megha went home and drew a red Trishul. The next day, a devotee from Pune, a follower of Ramdas Swami, came to Shirdi and offered a Shivling to Baba. Baba accepted it and handed it over to Megha, instructing him to worship it. Megha was overwhelmed with joy. This is how the story goes. So, the question that arises is—Baba first gave a vision and instructed Megha to draw a Trishul. Later, he physically gave him a Shivling. Through this, was Baba trying to convey that Megha should worship the Shivling? Or was he subtly hinting that he himself is Shiva? What exactly is the spiritual message that Baba intended to give? That is what we need to understand Chapter 28, Megha is a shiv devotee and Baba has a unique nature that he grants experiences based on a devotee’s form of worship, strengthening their faith But before we analyze this story, as you just mentioned, the chapter describes the tale of Trishul and Shivling. Now, Megha was already worshipping Baba’s image when he lived in the wada This is clearly mentioned in the scripture. Let me refer to the Ovi (verse) for better clarity. vi number 189, Chapter 28 states: “The mosque holds Baba’s living presence, while the wada contains his image.” At that time, there was only one main wada—Sathe Wada. Most devotees who came to Shirdi for Baba’s darshan stayed there. Megha had placed a large image of Baba in the wada, almost like a life-size portrait, and worshipped it with deep devotion performing aarti and rituals daily, both in the morning and at night. Now, if we observe closely, Baba's image in the wada and Baba sitting live in Dwarkamai —are they the same? Philosophically, they are one. But as an ordinary devotee, I may not comprehend this easily. A natural distinction forms in my mind: \"Here is a picture of Baba, and there, in Dwarkamai, he is physically present.\" This creates duality There is a distinction, right? Over there, Baba is present in a living form, and here, he is in the form of an image. To understand this better—consider that the image of Baba in the wada represents the soul (Atma), while the living Baba in Dwarkamai represents the Supreme (Parabrahma). Baba in Dwarkamai is full of consciousness and universal life energy (Vishwa Prana Shakti). That’s why the phrase \"Brahma-Atmaik Yoga\" is often used —meaning the union of the individual soul (Atma) with the Supreme (Brahma). Indirectly, Baba was revealing a deep truth—the journey of the soul toward the Supreme. So how does this journey take place? This is exactly what Baba’s Leela (divine play) explains further. Baba first tells Megha to draw a Trishul (Trident). What does this symbolize? Trishul represents spiritual effort (Purushartha) It is also a symbol of Shakti (divine energy) —urging Megha to channel all his strength toward spiritual realization. Then, Shivling can be held over it. Now, imagine a vertical Trishul standing upright. If we were to lay it down horizontally and place a Shivling on top of it, what does it form? The symbol of Om (ॐ)! This is profound! Baba was guiding Megha toward the realization that the day one understands the mystery of Omkar (ॐ), the journey from the soul (Atma) to the Supreme (Parabrahma) becomes easy. So, the journey from the soul (Atma) to the Supreme (Parmatma) is only possible through Omkar. And to reach Omkar, one must first make spiritual efforts (Purusharth) to attain Trishul. and when you reach till trishul then master, out of compassion will make trishul sit on it and proving omkar However, the deeper understanding of Omkar will be explored in Chapter 50, where we will try to open its mystery based on the divine light Baba has given. For now, it is important to understand that to travel from the individual soul (Atma) to the Supreme Brahman (Parabrahma), one must fully grasp the depth of Omkar. Until Omkar is fully realized, the journey remains incomplete. When Trishul and Shivling unite, they form Omkar. Wow! And this is the true worship of Shiva, a deeply profound and spiritual form of worship. The essence of this leela. Through this leela, Baba wants to say - praṇavo dhanuḥ śāro hyātmā brahma tallakṣyamucyate the wholesome purpose of this leela is to illuminate the depth of this sholka from mundaka upanishad The essence of this lila is not merely about the Trishul (trident) and the Shivalinga, but rather, it signifies the entire journey of the universe—because the entire cosmos is contained within this physical body (pind). This is the journey from the individual soul (Atma) to the Supreme Soul (Paramatma). This is the journey from an ignorant being burdened by illusion to becoming one with Brahman. The only purpose of Sai Satcharitra is to reveal 'purn bramha swarpchyut, aisa ha jeevatma purvavat, kadhi tari swaswarupat, pavava nischit he dhey' that every soul, which has fallen from its state of complete Brahman consciousness, will eventually return to its original divine state. this union of trishul and shivling is not merely a coincidence, it is omkar and this omkar is the scultor of entire universe",
    "Description": "ॐ साईं राम 🙏\nश्री साईं सच्चरित्र – अध्याय २८: शिवजी के परम भक्त श्री मेघा जी की अद्भुत कथा एवं ओंकार के रहस्यमय स्वरूप का गूढ़ विवेचन।\nइस दिव्य वीडियो में जानिए कैसे सद्गुरु बाबा ने मेघा की भक्ति को पूर्णता की ओर अग्रसर किया और त्रिशूल व पिंडी के गहरे आध्यात्मिक सम्बन्ध को उजागर किया।\nपरब्रह्म साईं होने के बावजूद, उन्होंने मेघा को क्यों अन्य देवी-देवताओं की आराधना के लिए भेजा? बाबा की मूर्ति और साक्षात् सरीर में क्या अंतर है? आत्मा से परमात्मा की यात्रा का मार्ग क्या है?\nश्री कृष्णा जी के मार्फत इस दिव्य लीला की आध्यात्मिक गहराई को समझें और अपने अंतर्मन में गुरु भक्ति की ज्योति जलाएं।\nॐ साईं राम 🙏\n\n#साईं_बाबा #आध्यात्मिक_ज्ञान #शिवभक्ति #गुरुभक्ति #साईं_सच्चरित्र #ओंकार #परमात्मा\n\nEnglish YouTube Description:\nOm Sai Ram 🙏\nShri Sai Satcharitra – Chapter 28: A profound spiritual discourse on the divine story of Shri Megha, the supreme devotee of Lord Shiva, and the mystical essence of Omkar.\nIn this sacred video, witness how the Satguru Baba nurtured Megha’s devotion towards perfection and unveiled the deep spiritual connection between the Trishul and Pindi.\nThough the Supreme Brahman Himself, why did Baba direct Megha to first worship other deities? What is the difference between Baba’s idol and His manifested body? What is the true path from the soul to the Supreme Self?\nThrough the words of Shri Krishna Ji, delve into this divine leela’s spiritual depths and ignite the light of Guru devotion within your soul.\nOm Sai Ram 🙏\n\n#SaiBaba #SpiritualWisdom #ShivaDevotion #GuruBhakti #SaiSatcharitra #Omkar #SupremeSelf\n\n\nREFERENCE :\nSHREE SAI SATCHRITRA ADHYAY 28 …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "1,963 views",
    "Likes": "170"
  },
  {
    "Title": "इमान से ही विमान",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=54IlF2lv3VM",
    "Transcript": "In Chapter 45 of the Sai Satcharitra, Baba tells Kaka Saheb Dixit: \"Hold on to your faith (Iman), I shall give you the aircraft (Viman). Sit in it without worry, And remain at peace.\" Indeed, Baba kept his word. According to this promise, Kaka Saheb Dixit merged into the five elements. This event is mentioned in Chapter 51 of the Sai Satcharitra. The scripture states that Kaka Saheb Dixit was once traveling by train with Shri Dabholkar. While resting his head on Dabholkar’s shoulder, in a moment, he passed away peacefully, as if boarding an aircraft for Vaikuntha (the celestial abode). But what is this aircraft that Baba spoke of as Kaka saheb left the body while travelling in train? Why did Baba use this analogy? Today’s episode will shed light on these questions. Om Sai Ram. Om Sai Ram. Friends today we are going to learn about 101st verse from ch 45 of Sai satcharitra from verse 103 to 107 describes the demise of Kaka saheb dixit It appears that kaka saheb merged the flame of his life without any turning or twisting of body as if he got into the plane now this serves the promise that Baba gave to Kaka saheb Krishnaji, here i have a question that Baba promised to take Kaka in a plane but here Kaka left his body while traveling in train and why Baba gives reference of aircraft is there any spiritual notion behind it. Please share guidance for it The verse in which baba tells kaka saheb dixit that your faith will be fruitful and i'll send an aircraft for you, sit in it scorning all the worries, It's speciality is that Such a promise was not given by Baba to any other devotee in the Sai Satcharitra. Now, the question arises of which aircraft Baba is speaking? untill we understand aircraft this leela remains unfolded. And also people may doubt his demise in train in spite of Baba's assurance for plane Baba always talked in Parables He never spoke in a simple and direct way Untill we understand this two words imaan and vimaan, this Leela remains unfolded Before understanding the aircraft that Baba talked of, i'll have one verse from 16th chapter of sai satcharitra for better clarity ch 16 verse 78 -'eka vihangam marg sevan, dujiya param para sopan, pari ya anadhkariya lagun, vauga shin bramha cha' in this verse Baba says that those who have reached to the culmination of being worthy for enlightenment for them vihangam path is prescribed and those who are engrossed in the turmoil of the world and senses for them Parampara sopan meaning step by step approach is prescribed Those who have attained spiritual maturity, developed detachment (Vairagya), and are at the brink of getting filled with devotion and wisdom, For them, the Vihangam Path (Direct Flight) is available. those who have reached the pinnacle of spiritual practice for them Vihangam path opens up Now, the question arises, what is this Vihangam Marg? To understand this, we need to go back to chapter 44. ch 44 verse 65 There, Baba speaks of a three-day Samadhi (deep meditation), during which he says, -\"ata yethun teen din, amhi chadhavito bramhandi pran, prabodhu naka amha lagun, Baba ni sangun thevile\" He said: \"For three days, I shall ascend my life force (Prana) into the cosmic expanse.\" This ascent of life force is the Vihangam Marg without any clarity about Vihangam Marg, we would take it as physical aircraft Not a physical plane, but the elevation of the life force over universe So, how is the life force raised unto the universe? Many people have a misconception that only those who practice Pranayama (breath control) in yoga can raise their life force. But that is just a preliminary process to stabilize the mind. What Baba is referring to is something much deeper. In the book \"Chidakash Gita\" by Nityananda Maharaj of Ganeshpuri, this spiritual mystery is explained. Nityananda Maharaj rarely spoke, He never had any discourse in front of many people but in the years 1922 to 1924, he shared some spiritual insights, which were recorded by a devotee named Tulsi Amma. In the \"Chidakash Gita,\" he gives an example of a pressure cooker to explain how the life force is raised into the universe. Imagine a pressure cooker with grains and water inside. When the cooker is placed on the fire, the water starts boiling, our mind is like the grains mixed with water impure mind and the fire represents our intellect with discriminating power. that inclines towards good over bad and repents for sins The one who has the strength to keep the mind heated on the fire (of discipline and self-control) is like a pressure cooker. When the cooker is placed on the fire, the water starts boiling, and steam is generated. The steam builds up pressure until it reaches its peak and is released through the whistle. That is Bramharandra the blowing whistle represents the opening of the Brahmarandhra (crown chakra) and the steam generated is the ascending life over universe So, when the conflict between mind and intellect reaches its pinnacle, the life force of ours ascends into the cosmic expanse. Baba says, \"I am raising my life force into the universe for three days.\" This is the Vimaan (aircraft) that he was talking about. The process of raising the life force into the universe involves the constant struggle between the mind and intellect. The mind is always restless, wandering in desires and impurities, a web of illusions, which is why the mind itself is called Maya If you want to purify the mind, then the intellect must work on it with great intensity. And if you have taken up this struggle with the mind, then it is not a struggle of a few moments; it is a lifelong struggle because the mind is mischievous. It keeps creating disturbances 24 hours a day, and the intellect must constantly purify it. This conflict, this friction between the mind and intellect, generates a third power, which is the upward movement of the life force (Prana). This Prana begins to rise upwards, which we call Kundalini. As soon as this energy builds up, it starts pushing upwards, and when it reaches its peak, it emerges from the Brahmrandhra (crown chakra) like a whistle and spreads into the universe. that is real Viman (aircraft), the one Baba is talking about This is a profound statement Baba is making about Kaka Saheb Dixit. Baba himself experienced this state for three days and showed it to the world. He is now promising to give the same experience to Kaka Saheb Dixit. so here railway too has the same meaning which analogous to shushumna and i will make you travel sitting in that shushumna till you come out from Bramharandra pervading entire universe So that is the experience, and that greater experience—Baba is speaking about it for Kaka Saheb. And before these words He puts up a condition that ur righteousness will bear fruits This word carry great meaning. Your faith—the faith you have shown toward me, the faith you have lived by throughout your life —Kaka, today, the time has come for that faith to bear fruit. And its result will be this: I will seat you in the divine chariot, elevate your life force, and make you the leader of the entire cosmos. Baba is indirectly giving his assurance. This is not just about physically taking you in a plane, because sitting in a plane is no great achievement; if you gather some money, anyone can do that. But the plane that Baba speaks of might take births for us. Now, the real question arises—why, in the entire Sai literature, did Baba give this promise only to Kaka Saheb Dixit and no other devotee? This is the important point. This is where the real question arises For that, I will take an Ovi. Why was such a great promise given only to Kaka Saheb Dixit? In Chapter 4, Ovi 154-155, at this point, Kaka Saheb Dixit has not yet met Baba. However, he has a close association with Nana Saheb Chandorkar, who was his friend. Nana Saheb Chandorkar, while speaking about his Guru (Sai Baba), was explaining to Kaka Saheb Dixit how great his Guru was. Just as every disciple holds deep reverence for their Guru, Nana Saheb Chandorkar had the same feelings while speaking to Kaka Saheb Dixit. Actually, when Kaka Saheb Dixit was living in London, one day, while trying to catch a train, he slipped, and his leg was injured—making him physically disabled in one leg. Because of this, Baba would sometimes lovingly call him 'Langda Kaka' (Lame Kaka). Seeing his disability, Nana Saheb Chandorkar said something significant to him. Let me take that Ovi He says - ovi number 154 - Dikshit happend to meet Chandorkar, from whom he(kaka) came to know of Sai's fame You just see the marvel of my Guru. Your lameness will disappear. At this point, Nana Saheb Chandorkar was, in a way, offering an incentive to Kaka Saheb Dixit, He assured him, \"My Guru is so capable that he will remove this disability of yours forever. Just once, take his darshan. Upon hearing this, Kaka Saheb Dixit gave a profound reply, a reply that revealed his entire character in just one statement. He said: Let my physical limp remain, Dixit does not find it as deficiency. The true lameness is in the mind—let your Sai remove that If your Guru is truly as powerful as you say, then let my physical limp remain. This is just a bodily ailment. But the lameness within my mind—the filth, the desires, and the impurities within me—if your Guru is truly powerful, let him remove that. That is the real eligibility At this point, Kaka Saheb Dixit had not even met Baba —yet Baba already knew about him. Baba saw countless devotees coming to him daily, but rarely did he find someone with such unwavering faith. Even before Kaka Saheb arrived in Shirdi, Baba had already set his eyes upon him. That is why Baba said: \"Phadāyel tujhe imān, Dhāḍin tujhe lāgī vimān\" (\"Your faith, your vigilance toward life, your wisdom, your detachment, and your clarity your repentance—this is what attracts me the most. It is because of this virtue that I will one day take you in the divine chariot. I will elevate your soul. On the surface, this may seem like a small event. But until the divine chariot (Vimān) is revealed, the connection between Imān (faith) and Vimān If someone possesses faith as deep as Kaka Saheb's, Baba will never delay in sending the divine chariot for them. In fact, Baba once said: \"For such disciples, I stand on one foot, Millions come to me for darshan, and while they look at me, my eyes are searching for those who have unwavering faith and righteousness This entire divine play (Leela) revolves around two words: Imān (faith) and Vimān (ascension). I hope this explanation has provided clarity.",
    "Description": "✈️ ईमान से ही विमान | श्री साई सच्चरित्र – अध्याय 45\nकाका साहेब दीक्षित, बाबा का वादा और दिव्य विहंगम मार्ग\nश्री साईं बाबा ने काका साहेब दीक्षित से एक असाधारण वादा किया था —\n\"मैं तुम्हें विमान से ले जाऊँगा।\"\nलेकिन जब समय आया, दीक्षित जी तो रेलगाड़ी में वैकुण्ठ वासी हो गए।\nतो फिर सवाल उठता है:\n🔹 बाबा किस विमान की बात कर रहे थे?\n🔹 क्या वह कोई भौतिक साधन था या एक आध्यात्मिक संकेत?\n\nऔर सबसे विशेष बात —\n🔹 बाबा ने यह वादा केवल काका साहेब दीक्षित को ही क्यों दिया?\n🔹 उनके जीवन में ऐसा क्या था जो उन्हें इतना विशिष्ट बनाता है?\n\nइस वीडियो में हम जानेंगे:\n✨ क्या होता है विहंगम मार्ग,\n✨ कौन से भक्त इस मार्ग से बाबा के धाम जाते हैं,\n✨ और इस मार्ग से मुक्ति का क्या गूढ़ रहस्य है?\n\n🕉️ श्री कृष्णा जी द्वारा इस अध्याय की आध्यात्मिक गहराई को सरल और सुंदर रूप में प्रस्तुत किया गया है,\nजिससे हमें साईं बाबा की लीलाओं के भीतर छिपी अलौकिक चेतना का अनुभव होता है।\n\n🙏 यह वीडियो सिर्फ कथा नहीं, एक बोध है —\nजो श्रद्धा, समर्पण और सच्चे जीवन मार्ग की ओर संकेत करता है।\n\n🎥 अवश्य देखें, अनुभव करें और आत्मचिंतन करें।\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiCharitra #KakaSahebDixit #VihangamMarg #SpiritualPath #Moksha #SaiTeachings #KrishnaJiExplanation #FaithAndLiberation #SaiLeela\n\n\n✈️ \"Faith Earns the Flight\" | Shri Sai Satcharitra – Chapter 45\nKaka Saheb Dixit, Baba’s Divine Promise & the Mysterious Vihangam Path\nShri Sai Baba once made an extraordinary promise to Kaka Saheb Dixit:\n“I will take you in a divine airplane.”\nBut when the time came, Dixit departed this world by a train, not an airplane.\n\nSo the questions arise:\n🔹 What was the airplane Baba spoke of?\n🔹 Was it a physical vehicle or a spiritual symbol?\n\nAnd most importantly:\n🔹 Why did Baba make this promise to only Kaka Saheb Dixit, and no one else?\n🔹 What was so unique about Dixit’s life and devotion?\n\nIn this video, we explore:\n✨ What is the Vihangam Path — the spiritual “bird-like” path of liberation?\n✨ Which devotees are taken on this path by Baba?\n✨ What is the deeper meaning behind this subtle promise of salvation?\n\n🕉️ Shri Krishna Ji presents this leela with great clarity and simplicity, unraveling the spiritual depth and hidden meanings behind Sai Baba’s words and actions.\n\n🙏 This video is more than a story — it’s a spiritual insight,\na reflection on faith, surrender, and the inner journey toward liberation.\n\n🎥 Watch, reflect, and let Baba’s teachings guide your soul.\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiCharitra #KakaSahebDixit #VihangamPath #SpiritualJourney #Moksha #SaiTeachings #DivinePromise #KrishnaJiExplanation #SaiLeela …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "1,730 views",
    "Likes": "182"
  },
  {
    "Title": "मोह नहीं, प्रेम",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=beOJkyA42ho",
    "Transcript": "As per the story written in Adhyay 8 in Sai Satcharitra Mhalsapati and Tatya Patil out of love for Baba used to sleep in Dwarakamai. But whilst sleeping everyone kept their head east- west and in north so that their feet touched each other. Friends, in normal life if we even by mistake touch others with our feet then we salute them and in this leela the feet of everyone touched each other. What is Baba teaching us by this amazing leela, we will throw light on this in this episode. Om Sai Ram. Friends Adhyay 8 in Sai Satcharitra, in that Tatya Saheb, Mhalsapati and Baba himself, there is a mention of their sleeping in a peculiar manner. For that I will read Verse 118 from Adhyay 8. Purvapachime uttares, doya tighanchya teen disas, Paay parasparanche payas, madhyabindus bhidati. So, let’s imagine east, west and north. On the east is Tatya Saheb and his head is here and legs here. On the west is Mhalsapati and his head is here and legs here and on the north is Baba and here is his head and here his feet. Sometimes Baba used to wake them up, sometimes he rubbed their back or press their head or put his feet on others, he used to do such leelas. Krishnaji the question here is, normally we do not sleep like that and in this we have this strange Baba’s leela. Through this what exactly Baba wants to say, please tell. In his every leela there is some lesson and there is no doubt in that. So, what is mentioned here, normally we never touch each other’s feet. In fact, we take care to see that we do not touch each other’s feet. We are cautious about that. But here it is exact opposite and it is clearly written that the three of them slept in three directions and all their feet meet at a place. Verse 118 from Adhyay 8. Purvapachime uttares, doya tighanchya teen disas, Paay parasparanche payas, madhyabindus bhidati. The meaning of this Verse is In east west and north, head of all three in three different directions, (means they did not let each other’s head meet) but the feet touched each other (means they connected their feet with each other) this way in the centre only their feet meet. And he never allowed them to sleep peacefully. So, if Mhalsapati was awake then both of them used to awaken Tatya Saheb and if both of them were sleeping then Baba did not let them sleep peacefully. There is Verse 19 Adhyay 8 for this. Aahaar nidra bhay maithuna, yahouni kahi na jane jo aan, To nar keval pashusama, pucha-vishanvirahit. Those who are into eating, sleeping, fear and sex, in these four things every human is trapped. These are the weakness of humans. Those who are trapped in these four things, they are animals without tail and horns. He says that they are like beast in human form who are trapped in these four things. Food, sleep, they have fear every moment, fear everything, scared of death, every moment what to eat what not to eat and he is like slave to sleep and sexual pleasure, these are four human weaknesses. This Adhyay talks about it and then the leela comes. It is relevant and we will have to see it together. One reason is that because of these four things he did not allow them to mingle easily, did not allow to be trapped, he used to work on that. Those who were close to him it was his work to take them towards that which is eternal otherwise this destructible would swallow them. The main reason was this. The direction of sleeping, say Baba used to sleep with head in the north and these two in the east and west, if you see this deeply, he did not allow their heads to meet, he comes in between. He does not allow the heads of Tatya and Mhalsapati to meet, he has come in between. And honestly speaking those who are walking the path of integrity, those who are living in their household and following their householder’s dharma want to be into devotion, those who want to live spirituality, in those households also Baba comes in between. The difference of opinion will always come. Then the question arises why does he come in between? In reality we have this misconception that towards the family members we have lots of love. Love is a very big thing, actually we are miles away from love. The pure love, selfless love towards each other we are miles away from that. We are entrapped in attachment towards each other. Attachment to wife, attachment to children, attachment to home, attachment to family but we have believed that attachment to be love. This is the bitter truth and we have to accept that. Love has not as yet penetrated far into our minds. Without purification of mind the stream of pure love cannot flow within. It is impossible. But we have given this false attachment name of love and we will leave the world this way. This is the bitter truth. So, what Baba used to do is in the house he did not allow heads to meet. What does meeting heads mean? If there is husband and wife and they agree, means head is one, means they agree, the thought process becomes one then the body intelligence will become more intense and will increase further. The lie will spread further, the lie will become denser. Baba used to come between the two heads that means he created clashes between them so that the attachment between them drops and the real love awakens. Related to this there is a statement from Jesus’s teachings I would like to mention that because it is very relevant. Mathew Chapter 10 Verse 34 – He says that I have not come here to spread peace but I have come with a sword. This is what Jesus says. I have not come to establish peace. I have in my hand a sword, a weapon. I will turn a son against his father and a daughter against his mother, a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. These are Jesus’s statement. Its not a small thing. Then he says a man’s enemies will be members of his own household There will be no outside enemies his own household members will be his enemies I will take that precaution. I will make them each other’s enemy. Like Jesus’s statement there is a similar verse in Sai Satcharitra. Adhyay 32 Verse 57 – Je je ghade te dev ghadavi, toch utaravi toch chadavi, Toch lade athva ladvi, karta karvi to ek. Which means that whatever happens in our life, happens because of the Lord. He only brings us down and he only pulls us up. He fights and also makes us fight. Please pay attention to this statement - He fights and also makes us fight. He is the doer of every karma means he is the one makes it happen. We should not take it negatively. You have to have a big heart to understand this statement. We have to accept that we do not have love between us. We are trapped in each other’s attachment; we keep serving each other’s interest and spend life. We will call love pure when selfishness drops and will live and die for my wife, the day I will live and die for my child, there will be no self-interest. That is pure love. But here there is give and take. It is business. And the root of this business is attachment not love. Baba is indirectly saying that he wants to drop the attachment between the two and so you two should go against each other and I will only take that precaution. So, when there are such situations in life you should not be afraid, if you understand the deep meaning behind this then attachment will drop and probably true love will take birth. Behind this story this is the depth is what I feel. The essence of this leela In the name of love, wearing the robe of attachment, I am carrying this body on the shoulders of the soul. O Sadguru it is due to your grace, that with your every blow the twist is opening. I am carrying my own corpse on my shoulders and walking. Every moment, wearing the mask of false love, I am unknowingly flirting with death. This attachment and this false love have become the identity of your eternal love. Sharpen your nails Baba this mask has become my face.",
    "Description": "Shri Sai Satcharitra: Adhyay 8 – Ovi 118 (Adhyay 14 – Ovi 19 and Adhyay 32 – Ovi 97)\n\n\"What is the difference between true love and attachment?\n\nHow do Sai Baba and Jesus guide us through this inner conflict?\"\n\nIn this spiritually enlightening video, Krishna ji explores one of the most essential questions on the path of devotion — the subtle yet powerful difference between 'Prem (divine love)' and 'Moh (emotional attachment / infatuation).'\n\nDrawing upon Sai Baba’s life stories and teachings from the Shri Sai Satcharitra, alongside verses from the Bible, this discourse reveals how true love is not comfort-based, but truth-based. It shows us how a Sadguru sometimes disturbs the familiar in order to awaken the divine.\n\n'What the video covers:'\n\n✨The symbolic story of Sai Baba, Tatya, and Mhalsapati sleeping together (Chapter 8)\n✨Explanation of Chapter 8, Ovi 118 and Chapter 14, Ovi 19 – and what they teach us about the bond between Guru and devotee\n✨The difference between Prem and Moh – love that liberates versus love that binds\n✨Interpretation of Matthew 10:34-36 – why Jesus said he came not to bring peace, but a sword\n✨Sai Satcharitra Chapter 32, Ovi 97 – when spiritual love challenges worldly emotions\n✨The deeper essence of this leela – love that aligns us with the truth, not illusion\n\nThis is not just a comparison between Sai Baba and Jesus, but an invitation to reflect on our own relationships, emotions, and spiritual intentions. It is a guide for anyone walking the path of devotion and seeking clarity between feeling and truth.\n\n||Om Sai Ram||\n\n---------------------\n0:00 Introduction \n\n1:18 Tatya, Saibaba and Mhalsapati sleeping story. Chapter 8.\n\n3:08 Chapter 8, Ovi 118 explanation \n\n3:52 Chapter 14, ovi 19, explanation \n\n6:11 Definition of Prem/ love and Moh/ infatuation \n\n7:50 Bible, Mathew Chapter 10, Verses 34-36\n\n8:20 Jesus scene \n\n8:55 Explanation of Mathew Chapter 10, Verses 34-36\n\n10:00 Sai satcharitra chapter 32, Ovi 97 explanation \n\n12:12 Essence of this Leela \n----------------------\n\nश्री साई सच्चरित्र : अध्याय 8 – ओवी 118 (अध्याय 14 – ओवी 19, अध्याय 32 – ओवी 97)\n\n\n\"क्या है सच्चा प्रेम और मोह में अंतर?\nसाईं बाबा और यीशु ने इस विषय पर क्या मार्गदर्शन दिया?\"\n\nइस ज्ञानवर्धक प्रवचन में कृष्णा जी प्रेम और मोह के गहरे अंतर को उजागर करते हैं — एक ऐसा अंतर जो हर आध्यात्मिक साधक को समझना आवश्यक है।\n\nसाईं बाबा के जीवन प्रसंगों और श्री साई सच्चरित्र के अध्यायों के माध्यम से, साथ ही यीशु मसीह के शब्दों और बाइबल के श्लोकों के माध्यम से, यह वीडियो बताता है कि सच्चा प्रेम (प्रेम) वह होता है जो आत्मा को मुक्त करता है, जबकि मोह वह है जो व्यक्ति को बांधता है।\n\nमुख्य विषय:\n\n✨साईं बाबा, तात्या और म्हालसापति का साथ सोने का प्रसंग (अध्याय 8)\n✨अध्याय 8 की ओवी 118 और अध्याय 14 की ओवी 19 की व्याख्या — और इनका आध्यात्मिक अर्थ\n✨प्रेम और मोह की परिभाषा — भावनात्मक लगाव और निर्मल भक्ति में अंतर\n✨बाइबल (मैथ्यू 10:34–36) का अर्थ — जब यीशु कहते हैं \"मैं शांति नहीं, तलवार लाया हूं\", तो उसका आध्यात्मिक संकेत क्या है\n✨साई सच्चरित्र अध्याय 32, ओवी 97 — जब गुरु का प्रेम हमें अंदर से झकझोरता है\n✨इस लीला का सार — सच्चा प्रेम सत्य के साथ होता है, सुविधा के साथ नहीं\n\nयह वीडियो उन सभी साधकों के लिए है जो अपने भावनात्मक संबंधों और भक्ति के मार्ग में अंतर को समझना चाहते हैं। यह दिखाता है कि गुरु का प्रेम हमें भावनाओं से नहीं, सत्य से जोड़ता है।\n\n|| ॐ साई राम ||\n\n#saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #shirdisaibaba #saisatcharitra #spiritualism #millennials #saileela #saibabateachings #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #youtube #shraddha #saburi #spiritualwisdom #krishnaji #bhaktipath #vedanticwisdom #innerjourney  #divinegrace #saikripa #saidevotees #saispiritualtalk #corespirituality #saileelarahasya #trending #like #comment #share #explore …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "1,704 views",
    "Likes": "176"
  },
  {
    "Title": "आत्महत्या नही आत्मनिवेदन",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ZAK71oK92s",
    "Transcript": "Om Sairam. Today, we will shed light on the story of Shri Gopal Narayan Amdekar as depicted in the 26th chapter of Sai Satcharitra. Shri Amdekar, a resident of Pune, used to work in the excise department. He was posted to village named jowhar in thane district. Due to some reason he lost his job and became unemployed, leading to a gradual decline in his financial situation. Being a devotee of Sai Baba, whenever he visited Shirdi, he would share his sorrows with Baba. Seven years passed like this, but his circumstances did not improve at all. Then, he thought that if he stayed in Shirdi for a few months and served Baba, his situation would surely improve. With this thought, he went to Shirdi with his family and stayed for two months, but even after doing all this, his financial condition did not change at all. Disappointed, he contemplated suicide one day and decided to jump into a well As he was about to take the plunge, Shri Sagun Meru Naik, a devotee of Baba, called out to him and asked, \"Have you ever read the book of Akkalkot Swami?\" Out of curiosity, Amdekar took the book, opened a few pages randomly, and began to read. He came across the story of a devotee of Swami Samarth who was deeply distressed by adversities and had also decided to end his life. He jumped into a well to commit suicide, but at that very moment, Swami Samarth appeared and rescued him, saying, \"It is not possible to escape from this world without experiencing its joys and sorrows. Suicide will not solve anything.\" Upon reading this story, Amdekar was deeply shaken. He realized that through Sagun Naik, Baba had sent him a message. He abandoned the thought of suicide. Further, in his ancestral devotion to Swami, Baba firmed him. Within a few years, Amdekar mastered the art of astrology, which provided him with a livelihood and brought him prosperity. This story raises two important questions: Firstly, why did Amdekar, a devoted follower of such a powerful Guru like Baba, face such financial hardships? Secondly, in the 29th chapter of Sai Satcharitra, Baba states that one should not seek astrology. Yet, Amdekar himself sustains his life through success in astrology. So, should one seek astrology or not? We will explore these questions in today's episode. Om Sairam. Before we delve into the story itself, let's briefly discuss the significance of the 26th chapter. A distinctive feature of this chapter is that whenever devotees of other gurus would come to Baba, He would reinforce their faith in their respective gurus. Filled with devotional feelings, He would send them back to the path they had originally chosen. This was a unique quality of Baba. For instance, Bhakt Pant, a character in this chapter, had his faith in his guru strengthened by Baba and was sent back to his guru's path. Similarly, the Pitale family, whose guru was Swami Samarth (who is also mentioned in the story), had their devotion to Swami Samarth deepened. And at last, Amdekar his ancestors' devotion, his father's devotion, is very deep towards Swami Samarth. So, Baba's feeling is that this person should go back there and get engaged, and that the ancestral sentiment, the devotion, should always remain alive within him. So, Baba is seen as pushing him towards Swami Samarth with a single-minded determination. This is the uniqueness of the chapter that Baba places devotees to their respective Guru to whom they are devoted The extent of Baba's vast compassion is proven in this chapter. Baba never had such narrow minded sentiment of making disciples whoever came to him So, wherever devotees had their devotion, they were sent back to where they belonged. This is the special characteristic of this chapter. Now, let's come to the story of Ambedkar. Ambedkar worked in the Excise Department of Jawhar This Excise Department, in the British era, was responsible for handling the excise duty on liquor. Now, we all know that when people work in such departments, their dealings with money become very close. Even today, people who work in such departments have a bad reputation, as it is said that they embezzle a lot of money. So, perhaps in that era too, Ambedkar might have made similar mistakes, maybe he misused the money. Then, the British government dismissed him from his job. After losing his job, his financial condition deteriorated drastically. Despite his devotion to Baba, he would often visit Shirdi and plead with Baba to find him a job or improve his financial situation. However, his financial condition continued to worsen. Through this leela (divine play), Baba wanted to convey a message: whenever we face difficulties in life, whether they are financial social, mental or physical we are responsible for it. Our actions are the cause of it, Through this lila, Baba wants to first tell us that if any kind of trouble comes in your life, then it is not without a reason. Your own actions are the reason for it, because without actions, there is no fruit. So, as you sow, so shall you reap. So this is the undeniable truth of the world. So there, Baba is trying to say, through this divine play, that perhaps that person was misusing money, so he lost his job, and then his financial condition kept deteriorating. And he became completely disturbed. So this doesn't mean that because we are Baba's devotees, everything will be fine, and Baba will only do good things for us if we simply worship him. If Baba were to do that, then we could never become truly righteous people. And as long as our morality and our dharma are not intact within us, then the avatar of Sai which has come to pour out the treasure of spirituality would be in vain. Main purpose of Him as a avatar is not come to fulfill our desires. Fulfilling desires is just like a chocolate in the beginning, like Baba says, if I have to give you bitter medicine, I first give you jaggery. So even if our desires are fulfilled to some extent, the sole purpose behind it is to first strengthen our faith in them. And then, using that faith as a foundation, they can guide us towards spirituality. This is Baba's method. So, it doesn't mean that we can do whatever we want in life and then turn to Baba's devotion when we're in trouble, expecting to get away with it. It's not possible. we have to bear the fruits of our actions. But, Sai's power can reduce some of the pain, provide some relief, but the fruits of our karma have to be borne. it's an undeniable truth. When he was completely exhausted and distressed, and when there seemed to be no hope, he thought, \"may be, as i visit shirdi once in a year to have Baba's darshan, my pain has not reached Baba.\" With feeling that if i would stay in shirdi for a long time in front of Baba then he might pity me and help me, he stays there for two months with his family He keeps presenting his troubles before Baba every time he visits, but Baba hasn't granted him relief. Then, when he sees that their prayers seem unanswered, he eventually fall into despair. This leads him to feel a rising sense of hopelessness and thoughts of ending their own life emerge. When that mindset takes hold of them, one day, he decides to isolate himself and end his life. He finds a secluded place, sit on a bullock cart, and contemplate jumping into a well to end his suffering. At that moment, sagun naik appears. He asks him, \"Have you read this holy scripture?\" Ambdekar replies, \"No, I haven’t.\" He hands over the book, and as the ambdekar opens it, Baba's compassion shines through. As soon as he opens the book, he comes across a story that mirrors their own life. It feels as though the story is about him, even though the character in the story is someone else. In the story someone else was suffering due to an illness, unbearable pain, and despair. That person had also considered death as the only way out. But when he tried to jump, the swami saved him and brought him back to safety. and after rescuing him out, Swami Maharaj delivers a lesson to him which has immense importance. I will take the verses as it is to make it clear. swami samarth appears there. rescues the afflicted All the suffering in your life are due to your past actions. They are not random. You need to endure the consequences of your actions, Suicide will not solve anything. Illness, Leprosy, Suffering, and Ailment in your life are due to your past actions. If you do not endure and complete the consequences of your actions then Suicide will not solve anything If your suffering remains unfinished, you will have to take another birth and suffer again from where you tried to curb it committing suicide . Believing you can bypass it this way is a futile thought. And so, bear with it as best as you can but do not commit suicide This is one of the teachings of Swami Samarth. He once told a devotee that in life, do whatever pleases you, but never resort to suicide. Just as murdering another person is considered a heinous crime, taking your own life is equally heinous, if not worse. He even said that if you hear of someone in your neighborhood committed suicide, never shower flowers on such person's body during the final rites. Instead, place a garland of shoes on them because such a person has committed an unpardonable crime. Similarly, here, Baba is explaining to Ambedkar that if today, in a moment of despair, you decide to end your life, your soul will not find peace. Instead, it will turn into a wandering spirit. You’ll roam the world as a ghost for countless years. You will witness the lives of future generations, but you will never be able to interact with them. You’ll see them, but you won’t be able to express your emotions to them. You’ll roam the world as a ghost for countless years. You will witness the lives of future generations, but you will never be able to interact with them. You’ll see them, but you won’t be able to express your emotions to them. You’ll suffer silently for what might be 100, 200, or even 500 years—no one can say for sure. Eventually, when the divine grace of the Almighty intervenes, you might be freed from this torment. But until then, your suffering will continue. This is the grave reality behind suicide and that’s what Baba is trying to make Ambedkar understand. He assures Ambedkar, “I am here. If you have faith in me, then hold onto that faith. Whatever pain and intensity of suffering you’re experiencing, I’ll help ease it. But the burden of enduring it lies on you.” Hearing these words, something stirs deep within Ambedkar's heart, and his thoughts of suicide vanish. Just as Swami Samarth once saved a distressed soul from drowning in a well, here too, Baba rescues Ambedkar, granting him a new lease on life. Not only does Baba save his life, but he also ensures that Ambedkar finds a means of livelihood. and guides him to master astrology, which becomes a source of income for him. Through this, Ambedkar leads a prosperous life, as described in the scriptures. Baba not only gives him new life but also secures his livelihood. Baba then instructs him, “The devotion your father had for Swami Samarth should be just as deep in you. Now that you’ve come here, I am sending you back to your Guru. From this day onward, dedicate yourself entirely and exclusively to him.” This story imparts several lessons: Thoughts of committing suicide—a heinous crime—should never cross anyone’s mind. Devotion to Baba or any divine figure does not absolve us of the consequences of wrong deeds Committing suicide condemns the soul to become a wandering spirit, watching the lives of future generations unfold but unable to interact or find peace for centuries. If we delve into the depth of this teaching, it becomes clear how profound this leela is. Additionally, in Chapter 29 of the Sai Satcharitra, Baba advises against practicing astrology. However, here we see that Ambedkar masters astrology and builds his life upon it. So, whether one should see astrology or not. First of all, the question you raised about Chapter 29, where Baba explicitly says in his divine words - 'do not be taken in by anybody, do not show the horoscope or rely on palmists' and here in 26th chapter Baba didn't advise ambdekar to pursue astrology Ambedkar had an inclination toward astrology, and Baba, seeing his interest, encouraged him indirectly. Baba remained silent, silence itself can sometimes be a form of encouragement. That silence, in a way, can be interpreted as Baba allowing him to pursue astrology. But let us clarify this further because this is a very good question. The question you have raised is very delicate and sensitive. Listen carefully, or else you might miss the point. For example, God forbid, if you were to have an accident, your head is injured, your eye is hurt, and your hand is fractured —head, eye, and hand. But you are conscious, you can speak, and the doctor comes and tells you that out of these three, you can save only two. You will have to lose one—head, eye, or hand. Naturally, you would want to save your head and eye, right? Similarly, if someone is on the verge of committing a heinous act like suicide, the primary goal is to save their life first for the Master. Although his trivial inclinations have been satisfied, at least for now, he has stepped back from suicide and understood the value of life. Take the example of a pregnant woman with complications. If a doctor tells her only the mother or the child can survive, most people would say to save the mother. Baba’s focus was on saving Ambedkar from suicide and helping him realize the value of life, even if that meant letting him pursue something Baba usually disapproved of. So, first, let the head remain safe; later, we can decide which turban to wear (metaphorically). When to remove and discard Jyotish Shastra from his life—Baba knows this better. So, out of compassion, Baba has given him a little leeway. This is how it should be understood. Otherwise, saying that Baba has encouraged Jyotish would be incorrect. This is a very delicate and subtle subject. Baba in the 29th chapter utters, \"Do not depend on the birth chart, do not trust astrology.\" whereas in this chapter he remains silent It is described that ambdekar has propensity towards astrology and therefore He(Baba) remains silent as his life is saved Otherwise, this person would have committed suicide and wandered as a ghost for 100, 150, or 200 years. At least now, he has been saved from that suffering. If his inclination is toward Jyotish, let it be for now. In the future, I, as the Sadguru, will remove the deep-rooted tendencies within him. This is the clarity Baba has. This does not mean that Baba has encouraged astrology. This is a very delicate subject. If we understand its depth properly, it simply means that what Baba is saying in the 29th chapter is absolutely true. This is the truth. If we follow Baba's divine guidance, we should trust our efforts and hard work in life, and know that Baba is with us. This seems very clear, but if we assume that Baba has encouraged astrology, then we will fall into doubt again. I hope this clarifies your question.",
    "Description": "📖 श्री साईं सच्चरित्र | आत्महत्या बनाम आत्मनिवेदन – श्रद्धा, संघर्ष और सच्चा समर्पण\nक्या साईं बाबा अपने भक्तों को केवल उनके शब्दों से नहीं, बल्कि उनके भीतर बसे अडिग विश्वास से परखते हैं?\n\nक्या डगमगाता हुआ भरोसा हमें हमारी ही समस्याओं में और गहराई तक खींच लेता है?\nक्या आत्महत्या केवल एक पलायन है — या हमारे ही कर्मों के बोझ से हार मानने का परिणाम?\n\nइस वीडियो में हम एक ऐसे गहन प्रसंग की ओर बढ़ते हैं, जहाँ कुछ बेहद जरूरी प्रश्न उठते हैं:\n\nक्या बाबा चाहते हैं कि हम ज्योतिष और भय में उलझें, या अपने कर्मों पर ध्यान दें?\nअगर बाबा का भक्त होकर भी कोई मानसिक, आर्थिक या आत्मिक रूप से टूट जाए — तो क्या उसके भीतर कोई सूक्ष्म अवरोध है?\nजब अंबडेकर जैसे विचारक भी परिस्थितियों के अंधकार में डगमगाते हैं, तो क्या वहाँ भी साईं की भक्ति ही एकमात्र प्रकाश बन सकती है?\n✨ इस अध्याय का सार एक बहुत ही महत्वपूर्ण अंतर को समझाता है:\n\"आत्महत्या और आत्मनिवेदन\" में क्या फर्क है?\nसाईं बाबा स्पष्ट रूप से कहते हैं —\n\"जीवन से हार मत मानो। आत्महत्या महापाप है, लेकिन आत्मनिवेदन — यानी स्वयं को पूर्ण रूप से मेरे चरणों में समर्पित कर देना — मोक्ष का मार्ग है।\"\n\nइस वीडियो में जानिए:\n🔸 साईं बाबा की दृष्टि में संघर्ष का वास्तविक अर्थ\n🔸 टूटे हुए मन को कैसे जोड़ा जाए\n🔸 और वह सूक्ष्म अंतर जहाँ हार और समर्पण का मार्ग अलग हो जाता है\n\n🌼 यह वीडियो सिर्फ एक कथा नहीं — एक चेतना है।\nयह आपके जीवन को नई दिशा दे सकता है।\n\n🙏 देखिए, अनुभव कीजिए और साईं बाबा के इस गहन संदेश से जुड़िए —\nक्योंकि हो सकता है, इसी कथा में आपको अपने जीवन का उत्तर मिल जाए।\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiCharitra #SpiritualJourney #SelfSurrender #SaiTeachings #LifeStruggles #MotivationThroughFaith #saibhakti \n\n📖 Shri Sai Satcharitra | Suicide vs. Self-Surrender – Faith, Struggle & True Devotion\nDoes Sai Baba test his devotees merely by their words — or by the unshakable faith hidden deep within them?\n\nCan a wavering belief trap a person further in their own difficulties?\nIs suicide an escape... or a result of being overwhelmed by one’s own karma?\n\nIn this episode, we explore some truly profound questions:\n\nDoes Baba want us to rely on astrology and fear, or to refine our own actions?\nIf a devotee of Baba still faces deep financial, mental, or emotional breakdowns — could the root cause be a hidden inner imbalance?\nAnd when even thinkers like Dr. Ambdekar begin to feel the crushing weight of life’s trials, can Sai’s devotion be the only light that leads them away from the darkness?\n✨ The soul of this chapter revolves around a powerful distinction:\nWhat is the difference between suicide and self-surrender?\nSai Baba clearly says —\n\"Fight your circumstances, but do not give up on life. Suicide is a grave sin, but self-surrender — offering yourself completely at my feet — is the path to liberation.\"\n\nIn this video, discover:\n🔸 The true meaning of struggle through Baba’s wisdom\n🔸 How broken minds can be healed through faith\n🔸 The subtle line between giving up and surrendering\n\n🌼 This is not just a story — it’s a spiritual awakening.\nIt may offer a new perspective on your own life.\n\n🙏 Watch, reflect, and connect with this deep teaching of Sai Baba —\nBecause perhaps, within this story, you might find the answer you've been seeking.\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiCharitra #SpiritualAwakening #SelfSurrender #FaithAndStruggle #SaiTeachings #HealingThroughFaith #SaiBhakti …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "1,463 views",
    "Likes": "151"
  },
  {
    "Title": "अनोखा शयन साई बाबा का",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EfgflezLP_M",
    "Transcript": "In the tenth chapter of \"Sai Satcharitra,\" it is described how Sai Baba used to sleep in Dwarkamai. A devotee once gave him a wooden plank. Baba hung this plank about 12 feet high with the support of fragile and Baba would sleep on it, lighting two lamps—one near his head and one at his feet. It was a marvel how such weak rags could bear both the plank's weight and Baba's. The people of Shirdi were curious about how Baba climbed and descended from such a height. Some devotees even kept watch to uncover this mystery. Irritated by this scrutiny, Baba eventually burned the plank in the Dhuni Years later, Baba spoke to Kaka Saheb Dixit about the spiritual significance of sleeping on the plank. that if you are fond of sleep on the plank and if you permit then i will arrange similar sort of plank Baba declined, saying it was not appropriate to leave Malsapati below and sleep above him. so dixit said that he would arrange another plank for Mhalsapati but Baba explained, \"Sleeping on a high plank is no simple task; it is not something just anyone can do.\" This entire account is mentioned in Chapter 45 of the Sai Satcharitra. Friends, today we will explore the spiritual depth hidden behind this extraordinary act of Baba. Om Sai Ram. Baba always performed such acts in solitude, not with the intention of showing them off. However, many people did witness this unique practice. The remarkable aspect of this miracle is how Baba managed to sleep at such a height—12 feet above the ground—on a plank tied with tattered rags. The Satcharitra describes that these rags could not even bear the weight of the plank itself, The question arose in everyone's mind: How did Baba climb and descend from such a height? The Satcharitra further states that for someone like Baba, who could transform into a fly or a mosquito by mere willpower, this act was not difficult. If Baba desired, he could assume such a form, ascend to the plank, and then revert to his normal state to sleep. This was as easy for him as it is for us to walk. The most remarkable feature of this miracle is that Baba, while sleeping on the plank, kept one lamp lit near his feet and another near his head. This seemed to signify that his entire consciousness, from head to toe, was filled with radiant light —something rare in ordinary human lives. If a person were to embody light from the top of their head to the tips of their toes, only then could they achieve such a spiritual elevation to sleep at such a height. The question arises: how does one attain this light? This brings us to the concept of Kundalini energy. Kundalini, as described, rises through the seven chakras. According to the scriptures, a person who practices immense honesty, integrity, and purity of mind may reach the fourth center, However, ascending beyond that to the Vishuddhi (throat) chakra, and then to the Ajna (third eye) chakra, is said to be extremely challenging. Beyond that, ascending from the Ajna chakra to the Sahasrara (crown chakra) is even rarer. Only a yogi of Baba’s caliber, who has transcended all limitations, can reach such spiritual heights. So, Baba's spiritual journey from the Muladhara to the Sahasrara was complete. We clarified this in the previous episode, where Baba went into Mahasamadhi for three days. It was said that he elevated his life force to the Brahmarandhra, meaning his ascending energy had already traversed to the crown of the head. That is why he had become pure consciousness from his feet to his head. The lamp burning at his head and feet symbolizes this state. The torn strips, instead of which Baba could bind with rope if he wished, signify the body-consciousness. Until the body-consciousness deteriorates and turns into shreds, the soul cannot ascend to the sky, the Chidakash. There, it is not the body that reaches the Chidakash, but the soul that finds its place. Once it reaches the sky, it spreads everywhere. The ascension to this height means that the soul has reached the Chidakash. Now, the question arises: how does one reach such heights? The story continues. When Kakasaheb Dixit asks, “Baba, as you’ve mentioned the plank today, should I arrange one again?” Baba replied, “No, it’s not right to leave Mhalsapati below and go up.” He is just an excuse for giving us guidance. Hence, he mentioned Mhalsapati's name, saying, “I can’t rest above without leaving Mhalsapati behind.” To this, Kakasaheb Dixit said, “If that’s the case, Baba, I will arrange the cot for Mhalsapati too.” Baba responded, “Do you think resting on a cot is a simple thing? It’s not for everyone; not everyone can manage it.” Let me take a verse to explain this better. From Chapter 45, Verse 136:‘ Nahi phadevar shain sope’ kon tiyevar mazvin zope, nain ughade nidra lope - where sleep ends, and the eyes remain permanently open. such a one can sleep on it. Only one who has conquered sleep can rest on such a plank. only such a person, who has conquered sleep, can sleep on the plank hung at such heights using torn rags. He also said, “You speak of arranging the cot for Mhalsapati, but I tell you not to do it. When I sleep, I instruct him to keep his hand on my heart and listen to the sound of my eternal repetition of God’s name. Even during the night, he should not sleep but keep listening to it. When he dozes off, his hand becomes as heavy as stone on my chest. Anyone whose seat is unstable or who has no control over sleep cannot manage to lie on such a height He said this about Mhalsapati: ‘Tyas chi nidra lagta jad, kar ho tyacha jaisa dagad' When he sleeps, his hand becomes heavy like a stone 'bhagat mhanta netranchi zapad, uduni khadbad jo kari' - he wakes up in confusion and fright and further He says - 'basva n jaya dharevar, aasan jayache nahi sthir, jo nar nidratamkinkar, nijel unchavar kevi' Sleep, hunger, fear and sex are human weaknesses. Sleep is a major weakness in humans. If even a day of proper sleep is missed, the body feels heavy the next day. Baba said that humans are so sleep-dependent that they are enslaved by it. He pointed out that those who have not conquered sleep, who lack control over it, are, in essence, no better than stones. Stones cannot float in the air and sleep is not just about resting the body; it represents awareness—or rather, the lack of it. if you attain a state of heightened consciousness, where one can fully understand, absorb, and live by the words of the Guru. only then this burden becomes so light, like a stone shedding its weight, that your soul begins to float in the infinite sky (Chidakash), free. this is what the leela is all about Om sai ram. The essence of this Leela The struggle between the goodness and evil, virtue and sin, dishonesty and faith of our conscience is truly the faith and religion During this struggle, an individual unknowingly ascends step by step. This ascent is the real spiritual journey. A seeker gradually, overcoming each hindrance, embraces death with a smile, and ascends beyond the crown chakra (Brahmarandhra), entering the infinite sky (Chidakash), merging with the universal life force, all while maintaining control over their body. By transcending the physical realm, Baba could effortlessly perform extraordinary feats like Dhoti-poti, khand yog, balancing on a thin plank (Chidakash Shehn). However, all this is possible only when we cultivate immense righteousness Despite being connected to such a great Guru, most of us fail to rise above the dust of our worldly existence. When will we prepare a bed in the sky above? Finally, Baba's teachings are beautifully echoed in the poignant verses of the longing and devoted Meera,",
    "Description": "💫Shri Sai Satcharitra Adhyay 10💫\nSai Baba’s Mysterious Sleeping Posture \n\nSai Baba’s sleep was not ordinary rest—it was a profound yogic state. The oil lamp placed near his head symbolized more than just physical light. It reflected his awakened inner consciousness and constant spiritual awareness. The ever-burning lamp was a sign of his fully active Kundalini Shakti and the divine energy flowing within him.\n\nThis video explores the deeper meaning of Kundalini energy and how Baba’s silent, motionless body represented a state of complete inner awakening. Even while lying down, he remained absorbed in supreme awareness.\n\nDetailed explanations from the Sai Satcharitra highlight this truth:\n\n🍁Chapter 45, Ovi 136 describes the divine fragrance and stillness of his body.\n🍁Ovis 140 and 141 show that although he appeared to be resting, he was completely merged in the Supreme.\n🍁Chapter 14, Ovi 19 confirms that Baba’s body was not ordinary—it was the vessel of yogic and divine presence.\n\nThis Leela reveals how Sai Baba had transcended body consciousness and remained in a constant state of self-realization. It invites the viewer to reflect on the depth of his spiritual stature and the silence that spoke more than words ever could.\n\n--------------------------\n0:00 - Introduction \n3:58 - Oil lamp on Saibaba's bed\n4:44 - What is Kundalini?\n7:51- Ch. 45 ovi 136 explanation \n9:30 - Ch. 45 ovi 140 explanation \n10:00 - Ch. 45 ovi 141 explanation \n10:23 - Ch. 14 ovi 19 explanation \n11:40 - Essence of this Leela \n----------------------------\n\n💫श्री साई सच्चरित्र : अध्याय 45💫\nOvi 136, 140, 141, अध्याय 14, ovi 19 \nअनोखा शयन साईबाबा का\n\nसाईं बाबा के शयन का यह अनोखा प्रसंग केवल एक साधारण घटना नहीं, बल्कि गहरे आत्मज्ञान और ऊर्जा जागरण का प्रतीक है। इस वीडियो में चर्चा की गई है बाबा के सिरहाने जलते दीपक की उपस्थिति — जो उनके भीतर सक्रिय दिव्य ऊर्जा, यानी कुंडलिनी शक्ति का सूचक है।\n\n'सिरहाने जलता दीपक' केवल एक बाहरी दृश्य नहीं था, बल्कि यह दर्शाता है कि साईं बाबा ने अपनी अंतःशक्ति को पूर्ण रूप से जागृत किया था। यह दीपक, उनके भीतर की ज्ञानज्योति और चेतना का प्रतीक बनता है।\n\n कुंडलिनी क्या है?\nयह ऊर्जा हमारे शरीर में मस्तिष्क के मूलाधार से सहस्रार तक यात्रा करती है। जब यह शक्ति पूर्ण रूप से जागृत होती है, तब व्यक्ति परम शांति और ब्रह्मज्ञान की अवस्था को प्राप्त करता है — ठीक जैसे साईं बाबा।\n\n साई सच्चरित्र के ओवी विवेचन:\n🍁अध्याय 45, ओवी 136: बाबा के शरीर से निकलती दिव्य सुगंध और उनके शरीर में व्याप्त शांति की अनुभूति।\n🍁ओवी 140-141: उनका शरीर योग की गहन स्थिति में स्थित था — “पिंडस्थ होकर भी परब्रह्मरूप”।\n🍁अध्याय 14, ओवी 19: यह ओवी स्पष्ट करती है कि बाबा का शरीर मात्र शरीर नहीं था — वह  योग-योगेश्वर के रूप में स्थित थे।\nयह पूरी लीला हमें यह बताती है कि बाबा का शयन और उनके शरीर से जुड़ी घटनाएं आत्मा की उस अवस्था को दर्शाती हैं जहाँ देह में रहते हुए भी व्यक्ति देहबुद्धि से मुक्त होता है। वे जलते दीपक की तरह सतत जागृत, तेजस्वी और पूर्ण समाधि की अवस्था में थे।\n\nवीडियो देखें और इस ज्ञानपूर्ण लीला का आत्मिक अनुभव करें\n#explore #motivation #trending #fyp #reels #youtubeshorts #youtube #youtuber #instagram#shirdi #shortvideo #shortsfeed #viralshorts #shorts #shortsviral #omsairam \n.\n[Saibaba, religion, teaching, spritual, reels, knowledge, educational, temples, quotes, saisatcharitra]#explore #saibaba #trending #fyp #shraddha #instagram #saidarshan #reels #reelsinstagram …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "1,593 views",
    "Likes": "161"
  },
  {
    "Title": "मिटने की मिठास (हाजी सिध्दीक फालके)",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RRm1FF1bJv0",
    "Transcript": "Om Sai Ram. In Adhyay 11 of Sai Satcharitra there is a story of a Muslim devotee named Siddhique Falke. He did haj Yatra of Mecca Madina and hoping to get darshan comes to Shirdi and stays in Chavadi situated in the north. But Baba did not give him darshan for 9 months to the extent that he did not even do any eye contact also with him. As such there were no restrictions on anybody coming to Masjid but Baba had restricted Haji Siddhique Falke from coming to the Masjid. He was very disappointed with this but he did not give up. When he came to know that Madhavrao Deshpande will be able to help him take Baba’s darshan, he requested Madhavrao to help him take darshan and Madhavrao also respecting his request spoke to Baba about him and asked for his permission to allow him to come to Masjid. Then Baba said, “Oh Shama, Allah has no mercy on him. Then how can he come to this Masjid? Since you are asking, I will give him permission but ask him if he will be able to walk the pathway near the Barvi well properly?” When Madhavrao told this to Haji he said how much ever full of thorns the path maybe I will certainly walk but give me the darshan of his feet. When Madhavrao told Haji’s reply to Baba said, “Will he be able to give me 4 times Rs 40000/- Go and ask him.” Madhavrao told this to Haji. Haji smiled and said what is Rs 40000/- If Baba tells me I will give even Rs 40 lakhs also. Listening to this reply from Haji Baba said to Shama, today there is a thought to slaughter a goat in Masjid. Ask that Haji if he wants flesh, flesh with bones, or testicles of the goat? Haji Siddhique Falke character was not an ordinary character. Many times, while walking the path of spiritually we generally meet two kinds of people. Sometimes one meets on the path of spirituality a person who has thirst for it and other one I say is the one who has spirituality itch. 99% people have spirituality itch to be honest. But there is 1% who has thirst for spirituality. Haji Siddhique Falke had that thirst. Because he believed Baba to be a guide, Sadguru he reaches Shirdi and wishes to take Baba’s darshan and he was chased away for 9 months again and again. He was not allowed to take darshan also. Inspite of this, he stayed there for 9 months. It is clear from this how deep his faith and patience are. Only a true thirsty person will stay with patience inspite of been chased away. From this itself what kind of character he is, is known from his wait of 9 months. 9 months has lot of relevance in the spiritual world. It is said that a child who is in the womb, the pain in the womb is very severe. The heat in the mother’s stomach, the child who is in the faeces urine in the stomach taking shelter there and stays alive, suffers hell there, it is said that the child yearns to get freedom from there, when he will be free from this stench and misery. It is also said he prays incessantly that he comes out from this door of hell and I will be devoted to you all my life and will take your name. It is written and said so. The moment the child comes out he is engulfed by Maya and he again forgets. 9 months has lot of importance. It is said that it takes 9 months for a person to reincarnate. Similarly in the spiritual world Baba wants to say for 9 months haji Siddhique Falke was chased away. Even then he remained in my prayers for 9 months. If we see the Charitra carefully then in Adhyay 9 of the same Charitra there is another leela where a foreigner comes to meet Baba. He sets up a tent and stays separately and he goes for Baba’s darshan and Baba stops him saying you will not come. But he feels insulted, what is this? He is just a fakir and what is this pomp. He is unable to handle this situation and he thinks of leaving, to hell with the Darshan. I will not stay here. I will leave. People go to Baba saying he is disappointed and he is folding up the tent Baba says tell him that he should not go today, he may leave tomorrow. There also Baba says something in his favour. But he feels that if you do not want to give me darshan then why should I obey you. So, he leaves. But the story tells that when he is riding the Tonga while reaching Kopergao he meets with an accident and he fractures his hands and legs and he is admitted to Kopergao hospital. There were such people also who could not wait even for a day. Here Haji Siddhique Falke waits for 9 months inspite of being chased away. To be very honest, today also when we go to Shirdi if we have to wait for few hours in the queue then we get upset. We wish to take Baba’s darshan as fast as possible and return. There also we want VIP passes. We should get darshan as fast as possible. We are living in this era. Really how wonderful those days must have been. How the people must have been who could wait for 9 months for Baba. Here it is proved that Haji Siddhique Falke did not have a spiritual itch. He was really thirsty. He was a mumkshu. Otherwise, no person would wait. After waiting for 9 months Baba sees that he has touched someone who is really thirsty. Others come to me for their own purpose. Now I have in hand a real thirsty person and now I must refine him. Baba thinks this and when Shama goes to Baba with his request, Baba’s court is open then why are you tormenting Haji Siddhique Falke. Why you don’t give him darshan? Baba says in Adhyay 11 Verse 95 Shamya tuzya othancha jar, ajun nahi valala tilbhar, Nashta allahchi khudarat tayavar, mi kay karnar tayasi. It means you will not understand these things. What I am doing with him and why I am doing so. It has a different depth. Now since you have come, go and ask him beyond Barvi, there was a well by the name of Barvi and is there today also. The path to Barvi is very narrow and bumpy, will he be able to walk that and reach me, go and ask him. In this question Baba is indirectly asking him you have to go through 12 years to reach me, the journey will be very painful, it will be very tough, will you be able to give me those 12 years, the way I had given to my Guru. In Adhyay 19 there is a reference of this where Baba says that for 12 years I stayed with my Guru like his shadow and the same thing he is asking Haji Siddhique Falke. Are you prepared to do rigorous penance for 12 years? Now the question is why 12? 12 years is considered a tapa. 12 has its own importance. In Sufi sect it is said for 12 years if someone sticks to his Guru like his shadow then by the end of 12 years there will be no difference between that Guru and the disciple, both become One. It is so believed. See the importance of 12, understand that in the morning if the Sun is shining, in the morning at 6.30/7.00 you stand in the Sun and the Sun rays fall on you then your shadow will go very far, early morning. But as the time lapses 9, 10, 11, 12, at 12 the Sun is above our head and the shadow comes closer to us and exactly at 12 that shadow merges into us. Similarly, that disciple, that devotee who sticks to the Sadguru like his shadow, who respects his feelings, who understands his inner feelings and lives accordingly, like that shadow he come close and closer, after 12 years that shadow merges into Baba. He becomes Baba. This is the importance of 12 years. In first question he tried to find out if he was prepared for 12 years. That was the first question. When he shows his readiness, he tells to ask him if 4 times he will give Rs 40000/- If we see this then it is clearly understood that there is no attraction to money, it is whether you can give me your life’s earning to me? Here Sacrificing the money means giving up on comforts. It is not about money. Why is a person greedy about money? The more money I have, the more I will be able to live comfortable life, will be able to enjoy comforts, live a luxurious life that is the purpose. Here Baba is finding out if you are ready to give up all the comforts. It is straight question. But the Haji Siddhique Falke is saying Baba what is Rs 40000/- I will give even Rs 40 lakhs. He is showing his readiness to give up everything. Baba says that he has passed even the second test. Then the third test. Then he says that I am going to slaughter a goat, what do you want, the flesh, the bone with the flesh or the private organ, what do you want from the three? In this question Baba is asking him to the point. The personality of a human is connected to 3 tattvas, they are the three covers on the individuality of a person, first cover is pride of the body that is the flesh, the next cover is flesh with bones, attachment to the body and the third is Body intelligence. All the three seem to be the same but they are not. The meaning of flesh is, in your life the pride that you have for all the name, fame and money are you willing to sacrifice? Flesh (meat) means pride of the body, the me ness which is there in every person’s mind, I will do something and show, I am something, can you put this at stake, can you give that to me, I am going to cut that. Are you ready for cutting that? In the first question he is saying that. The flesh with bone is attachment with the body. If for a person the upper cover breaks then the next cover is even subtler, attachment to the body. Attachment to the body means I may not have big dreams but I should be healthy, my family should be healthy and my basic things should always be healthy This attachment towards one’s own body and towards the family, my basic things should not go out of my hands. I want a job so that I can feed my family. This is the attachment to the body. On the superficial level pride of the body is tamo guna. Now this is the basic thing every person expects that my life should be at least this much healthy. I must have at least this much. But Baba is asking are you willing to give me that also. Private organ is even subtler, body intelligence. I will put your existence itself at stake. I want to destroy you are you willing to perish? He has hit his basic existence itself. Are you ready for that? He says Baba anyway I do not want anything; he says if he gets a piece of bread from his alms pot then I will be grateful for that. So, he pointedly tells that I really want nothing I am ready to perish in every way. That is why he is asking for renunciation. With the alms pot you are not the owner you are a beggar and a beggar has no right to demand that he wants to eat this or that. Whatever is received as alms is accepted for sustenance. He is telling that in every way he is ready for this journey. This Adhyay is talking about been erased and a true traveller on the path of spirituality is the one who knows the sweetness of being perished. The one who understands that there is a sweetness in perishing, is the sign of true traveller of spirituality. With these three questions he finds out that he is ready in all aspects, he is really a thirsty person and has not come with the itch of spirituality. I want to destroy even his body intelligence he will perish. I will get results. Baba sees this and, in a way, he is testing him. And when he sees that he is truly ready and he gets up and he takes the alms bowl and water filled pot and throws it breaking it. By doing this leela alms pot is where the food is kept and in the pot water that means he keeps him away from food and water means he made him face towards death because what is the basic food and water due to which survival happens and breaking that means to make him face death. Because till such time he perishes he cannot be made. There he is saying this by breaking it and makes him face death and that death which one likes and finds it sweet. Such a person will not fear because from within such a person knows to perish is to be anew. It is like a drop perishes to become an ocean that perishing is like this. The one who is going to perish knows well what it is to perish, what its sweetness is, my one-point existence will become all pervading existence. It is that kind of destruction. That person knows very well the sweetness in being perished and also knows well the depth of it. Baba breaking both the things shows that now I have put him on the path of perishing, from now onwards he will start liking death and will not be scared of it and then he bits his hand. Hand is the symbol of karma, of doer ship, Baba bits that. There he has bitten baba Siddhique Falke’s doer ship and then he goes to Haji Siddhique Falke. Then his Sattvic ego, and all his life the good deeds he has done and spiritual practices he had done, does he have that sattvic ego. Baba test that and there also Baba hurls abuses like you use your old age, do you read Quran like that, showing off that you went to Mecca all these lines, here he tells him that all the spiritual practices that you did in your life have you got Sattvic ego of that. He is washing off that in those words. That also should not remain. And after saying that he goes and sees that now he is ready in all aspects, now all his pride of body, attachment to the body and the body intelligence are all ready to perish and he is ready to perish. When he sees this then at that moment when the gardener’s wife is carrying mangoes in the basket, Baba purchases everything and sends it to him. Here Mango juice means God’s love, that sweetness. He fills him with love. Initially any devotee begins with love and we have not yet reached to bhakti. Mango Basket means love, pure love but it is not converted to Bhakti. By giving the mango Basket he in Haji Siddhique Falke donates love. After some time, he goes and gives Rs 55/- What is Rs 55/- There is sutra 55 in Nardiya bhakti which is a very important sutra where what real bhakti is, is defined by Narad Mahamuni. In that sutra 55 he says Tatprapya tadevavlokyeti After he gets into the Bhakti he sees his Guru, his God, in every particle. Tadevavlokyeti Such is his bhakti. Then he says tadaiva shrunoti If at all he wants to hear something then he wants to hear his Guru’s greatness only and he does not like anything other than that. Tadaiva bhashyayati if at all any words come out of his mouth then he will only speak about the greatness of his Guru. He does not spend his words on anything else. Only that comes out of his mouth. He wants to talk about that only. Tadaiva chintayati – after receiving bhakti he does not like to meditate on anything other than Sadguru, his father. So first his love goes denser and deeper and then it converts into devotion. Rs 55/- means devotion. Mango basket means love and after becoming an expert in devotion and seeing God in every particle and after sometime when Baba sees that I can reward him with Brahma meals then he calls him for having meals that is Bhrahma meal and we can say that it is the culmination of the journey. It is the destination of the spiritual journey. He thinks of him as eligible for the Brahma meals and making him sit near him saying I will make you the enjoyer of that Brahma which I also enjoy. I will feed you the same food that I eat. My meals are your meals now there is no difference between you and me. In a way this whole thing is a spiritual journey, where this journey begins and where it ends and in a way Haji Siddhique Falke is a subtle spiritual inner channel which reaches to its ultimate. If we see the whole story carefully then we see that many people have spiritual itch but Haji Siddhique Falke has true thirst and this story also tells us that this path is so tough, difficult. It is one thing to listen and understand and another thing to live it. That is why I say again and again that the one who knows the sweetness of perishing is truly thirsty. That is why Lord Krishna in 7th Adhyay of Geeta says in shloka 3 manushyanam sahasreshu kashchid yatati siddhaye yatatam api siddhanam kashchin mam vetti tattvatah Only one in thousand can digest the knowledge, becomes a siddha and amongst such siddhas one such siddha knows me completely as I am. That is why he says that it is not for everyone but if you are truly thirsty then a Sadguru like Baba is still with us. He also says that you take a step forward and I will take thousand steps towards you. His compassion is clear but there is lack of readiness on our part that we can reach him. So this whole thing is spiritual inner journey is what I would say. This leela and the questions and answers in that is actually an inner journey of a spiritual traveller. In this book in Adhyay 35 there is verse 137 – Bhaktigyanvairagyahin, Aisa jo bhakt toh ati din, Tayas Pratham vairagya sthapun, bhaktigyan mag deti. This means that the devotee who is without devotion, knowledge and non-attachment is actually like a beggar, all such devotees are made to sit on the throne of non-attachment, made to wear the crown of non-doer ship and then devotion and knowledge is donated. In this world Guru himself is without non attachment inwardly he is the master of sattvic show off and sweet words. Traditionally these hallow things have come in hand and the same garbage is handed over to the future generations. Only one of many Gurus is true. Karma, devotion and knowledge are priceless if they have non attachment. Without non attachment this karma, devotion and knowledge are only ordinary words. In this leela first Baba carves the devotee, make him a renunciate and then moment to moment gives him the nectar of love, devotion and knowledge. In this world blessed is that Guru who has the capability of perishing his disciple from within and blessed is that disciple in whom the sweetness of perishing has awakened.",
    "Description": "📖 Shri Sai Satcharitra | Chapter 11 | The Story of Haji Siddiq Falke\nThis chapter beautifully illustrates the profound virtues of Shraddha (faith) and Saburi (patience) through the inspiring story of Haji Siddiq Falke. It reveals what it truly means to “melt away” for the Divine and how sweet and blissful that experience can be.\n\nWhat is the immense joy that arises when one transcends the ego of the body, attachment to the physical self, and the intellect related to the body?\nHow can a person, by dissolving the sense of doership and annihilating the subtle ego, transform into a devotee like Baba and ultimately attain Param Brahma (the Supreme Divine)?\n\nIn this video, Shri Krishna Ji explains the spiritual depth of this leela with remarkable clarity and simplicity, unveiling the hidden mysteries contained within.\n\nDiscover the spiritual essence of surrender and learn how true faith and patience pave the way to self-realization and divine union.\n\n🙏 Whether you are on the path of devotion or seeking deeper understanding, this story serves as a guiding light to nurture your inner growth and connect with Baba’s teachings.\n\n📖 श्री साई सच्चरित्र | अध्याय 11 | हाजी सिद्दीक फालके की कथा\nश्रद्धा और सबुरी की पराकाष्ठा का अनुपम उदाहरण\nयह अध्याय हाजी सिद्दीक फालके की कथा के माध्यम से श्रद्धा (Faith) और सबुरी (Patience) के अद्भुत संदेश को उजागर करता है।\nयह केवल एक कथा नहीं, बल्कि यह दर्शाता है कि प्रभु के लिए स्वयं को मिटा देना क्या होता है — और उस मिटने में कितनी मिठास और परम आनंद छिपा होता है।\n\n🔹 कैसे कोई अपने देह अभिमान, देह आसक्ति और देह बुद्धि को त्यागकर,\n🔹 अपने कर्तापन के भाव और सात्विक अहंकार को मिटाकर,\n🔹 साईं बाबा जैसे एक आत्मज्ञानी संत के चरणों में लीन होकर परमात्मा की प्राप्ति कर सकता है?\n\nइस वीडियो में श्री कृष्णा जी ने इस लीला की आध्यात्मिक गहराई को अत्यंत सरल, सहज और सारगर्भित रूप में समझाया है।\nउन रहस्यों को उजागर किया है, जो पहली नज़र में केवल एक साधारण घटना लगती है — लेकिन वास्तव में वो आत्मा के पूर्ण समर्पण की कहानी है।\n\n🙏 यह वीडियो उन सभी साधकों और भक्तों के लिए है,\nजो न सिर्फ साईं बाबा की लीलाओं को देखना चाहते हैं,\nबल्कि उनकी भीतर छिपी आत्मिक शिक्षा को भी आत्मसात करना चाहते हैं।\n\n🌼 देखिए, समझिए और अनुभव कीजिए — कि कैसे सच्ची श्रद्धा और सबुरी से एक साधारण जीव भी परमात्मा तक पहुँच सकता है।\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiCharitra #HajiSiddiqFalke #ShraddhaSaburi #SaiLeela #KrishnaJiExplanation #SpiritualPath #SelfSurrender #SaiTeachings …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "2,394 views",
    "Likes": "218"
  },
  {
    "Title": "कथा पुंडलिकराव की",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dceuqu6hLLs",
    "Transcript": "Om Sai Ram! In the 51st chapter of Sai Satcharitra, there is a story about Shri Pundlik Rao and the coconut given by Shri Vasudevanand Saraswati, also known as Tembe Swami. When Pundlik Rao went to meet Vasudevanand Swami, the Swami gave him a coconut to offer to Sai Baba. when Pundalik rao headed shirdi to offer coconut he accompanied himself with his 4 friends during the journey they got thirsty and with the intention they halted by the canal. But one of them said, \"It is unhealthy to drink water empty stomach\" someone brought chiwda (flattened rice), but it was too spicy. Someone suggested, \"Mix the coconut with the chiwda, and it will taste better.\" As soon as this was said, the coconut was brought forward. It was immediately broken, mixed with the chiwda, and everyone ate it, drank water, and continued their journey. On the way, Pundlik Rao realized that the coconut mixed into the chiwda had been given by Shri Vasudevanand Swami to be offered to Sai Baba. Now he was worried and filled with regret about what he would present to Sai Baba upon reaching Shirdi. With these thoughts, Pundlik Rao reached Shirdi. When they all went to see Baba, as soon as Baba saw Pundlik Rao, He said, \"give me what my friend has sent for Me.\" Hearing this, Pundlik Rao was utterly embarrassed. He confessed everything to Baba and said he would bring another coconut to offer. But Baba replied, \"Even if you bring thousands of coconuts, none will be like the one given to you. Now don’t regret it unnecessarily. When I had the desire to call you, that very moment the coconut came into your hands, and it broke according to My wish. Don’t burden yourself with unnecessary guilt because whatever good or bad you do, it happens only with My will.\" Friends, two questions arise here. First, why did Baba insist on the same coconut when Pundlik Rao wanted to offer Him another one? What was so special about that coconut? Second, from the first chapter to the fiftieth chapter of Sai Satcharitra, the focus has been on human effort and hard work (purushartha). But suddenly, in the fifty-first chapter, Baba dismisses the concept of effort and says, \"Whatever good or bad you do, it happens only with My will.\" This contradictory is beyond comprehension. These are the points we will shed light on in today’s episode. Pundlik Rao's story is about a devotee from Nanded who travels all the way from Maharashtra to rajmundry, a city of Andhra Pradesh to have darshan of Tembe swami. As swami comes to know that Pundalik rao hails from Nanded and since Nanded is close to shirdi, he gives him a coconut and said, \"Take this to my Baba (Sai Baba) and tell Him that I seek His grace and blessings. May my devotion and love for Him grow stronger day by day. This is my heartfelt wish, and I am entrusting this coconut to you.\" The essence here lies in the sentiment with which the coconut was given. Tembe Swami, despite being a renowned saint on the path of karma (action), revered Sai Baba with deep devotion and humility. The value lies in the sentiment, not in the coconut. The coconut was a medium, a symbolic representation of his devotion, but valuable are the feelings emerging from his heart His intention was that his feelings be conveyed to Baba through the coconut. Pundlik Rao, however, leaves for shirdi after the passage of a month Therefore, the memory of this responsibility loosened up. and compels him to forget it's importance Later as the story tells when hunger struck during the journey, he had some chiwda (flattened rice) but found it too spicy. To counter this, he broke the coconut and mixed it with the chiwda. This satisfied his hunger, but it wasn’t long before he realized his mistake—that the coconut meant for Sai Baba had been used. When Pundlik Rao reached Shirdi and met Baba, the first thing Baba said was, \"Where is the coconut sent by my friend? Pundlik Rao was filled with shame and confessed the entire incident to Baba. He apologized profusely and offered to bring another coconut to replace it. But Baba replied, \"Even if you bring a thousand coconuts, they cannot equal the one sent by my devotee.\" The sentiment and devotion with which it was sent have already reached Baba Indirectly, Baba conveyed to Pundlik Rao that it wasn’t that you ate coconut but you indifferent the faith and sentiment behind it. And therefore even if you bring 1000 of coconuts to offer, they cannot match the one given by my brother.\" so, saints know each others feeling is the depth of this story. and their gaze always rests on the inner intention, not on the external object. Pundalik Rao, completely overwhelmed mentally, was feeling very low. Only then did Baba speak further, asking why he stood before Him with such a heavy heart. Baba said, \"You didn’t intentionally do it. As if You remembered it completely and ate it giving more importance to your hunger than offering. Yes, a mistake happened, but why hold onto unnecessary regret? Taking advantage of this Baba is inscribing a deep spiritual teaching in Pundalik rao saying.\" Do you know why are you regretting too much? because you nurture you ego on doing some good deed that it forces you to regret over such a small mistake.\" The ego you maintain over your virtuous actions is actually the reason behind this regret. If you would not hold onto the ego of your good deeds, you wouldn’t feel this remorse. Those thoughts would not have occurred. You would have been free from ego for both when Baba sees that Pundalik Rao is completely embarrassed and has realized his mistake, He then offers guidance, saying, You didn’t intentionally eat the coconut. It happened by mistake, it slipped your memory, and that mistake occurred unintentionally. So why carry unnecessary regret? To comfort his heavy heart, Baba expresses, “why do people own their meritorious deeds alone and not their sins?.” This is a very sensitive statement, as it is often misunderstood. People often misinterpret this by thinking that Baba is saying you can neither commit good nor bad deeds, as I am the doer you shed your pride as doer but who can except Baba know that which vow apply on whom and when When Baba speaks about 'Zor Tumhi Kadho Laga, Phalachi Kalgi Sarvaswityaaga', which appears in Chapter 19, He emphasizes the concept of Purushartha Unless you do Purushartha, you will not be bestowed with Siddhis by Me. However, as the fifty-first chapter progresses, the idea shifts to the need to relinquish both pride in virtues and sins. Only when both forms of ego are overcome can one reach the peak of humility and true surrender. And 101% this applies to those who have reached the pinnacle of spiritual effort. In the beginning stages of spiritual practice, no true Guru can impart such teachings to a disciple. This understanding must first be internalized. Consider, if i am at the initial stage of spiritual practice and my guru stands in front of me telling me to shed the ego over virtues and sins, it is not possible at all as without virtuous deeds how one can have ego over it. To carry the ego of virtues, i need to execute many good deeds If, hypothetically, I have acted recklessly and with little devotion towards the virtues taught by the scriptures or the Sadguru, then those words do not apply to me from Chapter 51. In the beginning, Baba's words for Purushartha that What is right, what is wrong? What is dharma, what is adharma? What is righteous, what is unrighteous? First of all, I need to gain full knowledge of it, and according to that, with full devotion and patience, I must live my life. And the day when i get exhausted by the effort even if I have spent a long time doing it without achieving ceaseless devotion towards Baba. So at that moment, the Sadguru Himself descends into my life and tells me that Krishna, after today, the ego of virtue, passion, or ignorance will no longer remain in your life. Whatever is happening in your life, the real doer is I. However, those words should come at the right time. They should come through the Sadguru. I cannot adopt those words on my own. And the Sadguru gives those words only when they have seen that despite doing so much, one has not attained siddhi (spiritual accomplishment). One's ego has melted, dissolved. Now, if I instill depth into that egolessness, then it will get fully absorbed in his heart. And if you sit nurturing the ego of the virtue (sattva gun), then, in reality, just as ignorance (tamo gun) is bad, in the same way, even virtuous actions (sat karma) are perilous because the virtuous actions are like chains of gold, while non-virtuous actions are like chains of iron. Both must be discarded as both captives You must reach the peak of that egolessness, where Brahma-knowledge becomes easier. But one must reach that stage to listen and grasp these words Baba is also speaking of these words at Chapter 51—meaning towards the end of the scripture. The chapters before that focus on effort (purusharth). If I haven’t truly fulfilled that effort, if I have not exhausted myself in that effort, if my ego has not melt. So, no Sadguru will implant those words in my life. Additionally, those words should only come at the right time through the Sadguru—today, after this moment, you should no longer harbor that ego. I should not adopt such words prematurely. Currently, if I am in the stage of effort, and if I am in the initial stage of sadhna, then the verse from Chapter 91 that you mentioned zor tumhi kaado laaga, phalachi kaalgi sarvaswatyagaa—which speaks of the immense struggle, And understanding what is right and what is wrong, what is dharma and what is adharma, must be fully followed no doubt. Even after doing so, in the realm of my actions, my efforts, I will not attain God. Because if that happens, my ego will grow so much that there will be no limit to it. My actions cannot lead to God-realization, but the potential to melt that ego increases through my actions. The depth of my devotion towards effort determines the extent to which my ego dissolves. Even though I may not realize it, in my efforts, my ego of doership is gradually melting. Despite years of effort and practice, despite all the sadhna (spiritual practice), siddhi (spiritual accomplishment) still eludes me, my heart is not purified, and I do not attain unwavering devotion to Him. When my heart realizes that despite doing all this, I still remain nowhere, and when I surrender everything, laying down my arms, and bowing my head at the Sadguru’s feet, at that moment, the Sadguru descends. Then, the words from Chapter 51 are imparted to me, and I don’t adopt those words on my own. Instead, they are received as blessings. This subtlety is why I say that after reaching Chapter 51, these words come from Baba. The previous fifty chapters focus on effort. Therefore, before speaking of such things, one must carefully consider if there is a devotee at the initial stage, ensuring they are not misguided. If such caution is maintained, I believe we will carry out a very responsible task. Otherwise, we might lead even sincere individuals onto the wrong path. There is great subtlety involved. And let me refer to the Bhagavad Gita as well. The Bhagavad Gita has eighteen chapters, with the majority focusing on Karma Yoga. They emphasize converting actions into Karma Yoga, transforming actions into virtues. As you go through virtuous deeds, sattvic ego naturally increases. At that point, the Sadguru feels it is the right time to guide towards diminishing that sattvic ego, and at that moment, the teachings of Chapter 51 are given. Hence, in the Bhagavad Gita, from the first to the last, the teachings evolve—from karma, devotion, knowledge—to surrendering all dharmas to seek refuge in the divine alone. Until this clarity is achieved, the spiritual path can become daunting and lead astray. Therefore, at the right time, with the right guidance, we remain firmly on the path, moving forward in the correct direction and Baba will bestow His blessings I believe this is a highly sensitive subject, requiring clear understanding of which teachings apply to us and which do not. If each person internalizes this deeply, I believe they will progress better. Through this leela (divine play), Baba is giving us two lessons. The first is that you can buy thousands of coconuts from the market, but where will you find the sentiment (emotion) that cannot be purchased in the market? That sentiment emerges only as sanskaras (impressions) after a lifetime of burning in the fire of my dhuni (sacred fire). Now, the second and final lesson from this leela: to reach me, you must pass through four \"Pr's. Pr means Prayas (effort), Pr means Prarthana (prayer) Pr means Pratiksha (patience/waiting), and Pr means Prasad (grace or divine blessing). To reach my grace-like prasad, everyone must go through effort, prayer, and patience. The end of doership (ego of actions) is possible only after endless efforts in Karma Yoga. Just as deep sleep comes after physical exhaustion, similarly, samadhi (spiritual absorption) comes after exhaustion of conscience. Even in the nine forms of devotion (navadha bhakti), only after practices like archana (worship), vandana (salutation), and dasyam (servitude) does one reach sakshyam bhakti (complete surrender). Similarly, in the sequence of yoga, yama (restraints), niyama (observances), and asana (postures) come first, and only then do dhyana (meditation) and samadhi follow. In conclusion, my heart says this about the leela: no matter how great a warrior someone is, they reach their destination only by walking the path. Those who are frightened by the difficulties of the path are devoured by the illusions and temptations of this world.",
    "Description": "📖 श्री साई सच्चरित्र - अध्याय ५१ | कथा पूंडलिकराव जी की\n🔔 एक नारियल, दो संत और अद्वितीय भक्ति की कथा\nएक नारियल किस प्रकार एक संत (टेंबे स्वामी) की दूसरे संत (सदगुरु साई बाबा) के प्रति गहन श्रद्धा और प्रेम का प्रतीक बन सकता है...? यह केवल एक वस्तु नहीं, बल्कि संतों के बीच की दिव्य एकता और निरभिमान प्रेम की कहानी है।\n💠 कर्तापन के भाव का अंत कैसे हो...?\nनिरअहंकारता की चरम अवस्था को प्राप्त करने के लिए कैसे हम अपने भीतर के 'मैं करता हूँ' के भाव को त्यागें...?\nबाबा के द्वारा दिए गए यह वचन भक्त को कब और किस अवस्था में प्राप्त होते हैं...?\n🕉️ इस वीडियो में जानिए:\nएक नारियल के पीछे की गूढ़ आध्यात्मिक व्याख्या\nकर्तापन (Doership) के अहंकार को मिटाने का मार्ग\nबाबा की कृपा प्राप्त करने के लिए आवश्यक पुरुषार्थ\nऔर वह चार \"प्र\", जिनसे होकर हर सच्चे भक्त को गुजरना होता है:\n👉 प्रश्न, प्रयत्न, प्रपत्ति, और अंत में प्रसाद।\n🎥 श्री कृष्णा जी द्वारा प्रस्तुत इस सुंदर और गहराई से भरे हुए प्रवचन को अवश्य देखें और साईं भक्ति की राह में एक कदम और आगे बढ़ें।\n🔗 अब वीडियो देखें, मनन करें और अपने जीवन में साईं बाबा की भक्ति को और प्रगाढ़ करें।\n🙏🏻 साईं राम!\n#SaiBaba #SaiSatcharitra #SpiritualWisdom #PundalikRao #TembeSwami #SaiKripa #BhaktiMarg #KrishnaJiPravachan\n\n📖 Shri Sai Satcharitra – Chapter 51 | The Story of Pundalikrao Ji\n🔔 How a single coconut became the symbol of a saint’s deep devotion towards another saint!\nHow can a simple coconut express the boundless love and reverence one saint (Tembe Swami) held for another (Sadguru Sai Baba)? It’s not just an offering—it’s a divine gesture, revealing the egoless love between realized souls.\n💠 How do we dissolve the sense of doership (kartapan)?\nTo reach the peak of egolessness, how can one truly let go of the “I am the doer” feeling?\nAt what stage of inner growth does a devotee receive these profound words of Baba?\n🕉️ In this video, explore:\nThe deep spiritual meaning behind a single coconut\nThe journey from ego to surrender\nHow much effort (purushartha) is truly needed before divine grace flows\nAnd the four \"Pra\"s every seeker must pass through:\n👉 Prashna (question), Prayatna (effort), Prapatti (surrender), and finally Prasad (grace).\n🎥 Watch as Shri Krishna Ji beautifully explains the subtle depth of Baba’s teachings and reveals how one can move from devotion to complete union with the Divine.\n🔗 Watch now, reflect deeply, and walk further on the sacred path of Sai Bhakti.\n🙏🏻 Sai Ram!\n#SaiBaba #SaiSatcharitra #SpiritualWisdom #PundalikRao #TembeSwami #SaiGrace #BhaktiPath #KrishnaJiDiscourse …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "1,737 views",
    "Likes": "156"
  },
  {
    "Title": "अनंतराव पाटणकर जी की नवविधा भक्ती",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KF8zIEAovDo",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "#explore #motivation #trending #fyp #reels #youtubeshorts #youtube #youtuber #instagram#shirdi #shortvideo #shortsfeed #omsairam .[Saibaba, religion, teachin...",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "सही साधना सही समय पर !",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t_ZuqQS1-io",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "#explore #motivation #trending #fyp #reels #youtubeshorts #youtube #youtuber #instagram#shirdi #shortvideo #shortsfeed #omsairam .[Saibaba, religion, teachin...",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "\"ना कुछ से... सबकुछ\" (सपटनेकर की बोध कथा) / साईभक्त सपटनेकरांची बोधकथा",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U82OeDQUy18",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "🍁Shri Sai Satcharitra Adhyay 48 (Ovi 51-150)🍁In this deeply insightful talk, Krishnaji unveils the hidden layers of Sapatnekar’s story from the Sai Satchar...",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "सत्पुरुष और महापुरुष में क्या अंतर हैं? / Difference between Satpurush and Mahapurush.",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BnWXQXZQL9E",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "📖 श्री साईं सच्चरित्र | अध्याय 21 | विनायक हरिश्चंद्र ठाकुर जी की कहानीइस प्रेरणादायक भाग में हम विनायक हरिश्चंद्र ठाकुर की अद्भुत यात्रा का परिचय पाते हैं ...",
    "Tags": "Shri Sai Satcharitra, Sai Baba teachings, Spiritual journey, Advaita Vedanta, Mahapurush meaning, Indian saints, Spiritual guidance, Self-realization, Sai Baba stories, Spiritual awakening, Hindu spirituality, Spiritual evolution, Divine grace, श्री साईं सच्चरित्र, विनायक हरिश्चंद्र ठाकुर, सत्पुरुष और महापुरुष, साईं बाबा शिक्षाएं, आध्यात्मिक यात्रा, अद्वैत वेदांत, भारतीय संत, आत्मसाक्षात्कार, साईं बाबा की कहानियां, आध्यात्मिक जागरण, हिन्दू आध्यात्म, दिव्य कृपा",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "ईशावास्य उपनिषद सार - साई वाणी",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9djOwNqGUYo",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "🏵️Chapter 20 – Sai Satcharitra- The Maidservant's Lesson: Unlocking the Ishavasya Upanishad in Sai Satcharitra.Chapter 20 of the Sai Satcharitra features an...",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "एक नर ही नारायण बनकर अवतार लेते है",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GoV5ZVP9cpo",
    "Transcript": "Om Sai Ram A topic arose in my mind, I’ll begin with that \"It Begins in Bhakti, and Culminates in Bhakti\" I will unfold the meaning. There’s a verse we all know: “Yada yada hi dharmasya glanir bhavati bharata…” This shloka declares that whenever Dharma declines and Adharma rises, I manifest myself again and again to restore Dharma. So does that mean only God can incarnate? This is what we've been taught: That whenever unrighteousness prevails in this world, God incarnates again and again to destroy Adharma and reestablish Dharma. Lord Krishna said so \"Abhythanamadharmasya tadatmanam srijamyaham\" But I have a question, for you all: If it is always God who incarnates and restores dharma, then what relevance remains for Advaita philosophy? Does it mean that, through His own maya, He Himself gives rise to adharma, causes turmoil in the world, and when people are utterly helpless, He Himself returns to protect them? Doesn’t this sound shallow? Doesn’t it feel meaningless? And this is exactly what we’ve been taught That God keeps incarnating in different forms, we even have a list of the Dashavatara. Great, ten divine incarnations of Vishnu. But again, we are told: Whenever righteousness falters and Adharma rises, The Lord, repeatedly manifests himself, to destroy Adharma But, I don't believe in this Because if that were so, then it would become a kind of divine tyranny and man would remain just a puppet. Then what need would there be for human effort, for sadhana, for striving? Living the Advaita philosophy would lose all its value. Please understand this carefully. So, what does Advaita mean? That the individual soul and the Supreme are one - there is no difference. The jivatma and the paramatma are one and the same, we all accept this If they are truly one, then when the jivatma attains the Supreme, can that same Individual Soul not return to incarnate? Why must the Supreme Soul return again and again? The reality is, the interpretation that we've made is very superficial that Supreme Soul takes the avatar and comes again and again. No, it's not like that. If an Individual Soul walks sincerely upon the path shown by the Lord, if one follows His footsteps, understands His heart, acts accordingly, and continues, undeterred by obstacles, completing the spiritual journey - then he too attains that same completeness, He and the Divine become one. In reality, if that Individual Soul still retains the sacred resolve that “I must serve,” and with this divine resolve, He dissolved into the Divine. then that same Individual Soul returns to this world - as Sai Baba, as Swami Samarth, as Gajanan Maharaj. That means, when the journey of a jivātma comes to its sacred completion, it becomes eligible to descend again, as an Avatar If it is so, then Advaita has a meaning. If that’s not true, then Advaita is meaningless. Then Individual Soul is just a puppet. \"I will make you dance, and you shall keep dancing.\" I will give liberation, whenever I want to That’s dictatorship! God is not so petty. He is magnanimous—so magnanimous that if He chooses to give, He gives His very own Self, His very own completeness, to His devotee. This is an Avatar. But the concept that has been planted in our minds that it is always the same Divine who keeps incarnating… Well, if that were true, then what glory remains for human upliftment? The very value of human striving has been lost. Then human birth itself is in vain. If the jivātma could not behold its own completeness, if it failed to attain the wholeness it was born for And if that soul could not descend again, bearing its own completeness then honestly, I’d say this whole creation, this whole cosmos, is just a farce. It means we have terribly misunderstood it. And that's why in today's topic I'll prove how it is How the journey begins with devotion, and ends with it. and every Avatar, Be it Sai Baba, Swami Samarth, or Gajanan Maharaj Their journeys began in devotion and ended in devotion. Today, they shine forth as embodiments of devotion. They know the entirety of yoga. They are filled with the deepest of knowledge They know the secret of all karma. They know everything and still - they appear in this world as embodiments of bhakti. Now let me describe this journey: How does an Individual soul reaches Supreme Soul? Let us look at the life of an ordinary person. He begins with simple devotion. He knows nothing of Karma Yoga, Bhakti Yoga, Jnana Yoga, or Raja Yoga He only knows simple, straightforward devotion. As he deepens in devotion, truths begin to reveal themselves The first truth that dawns upon him is this: “All my devotion so far was laced with selfishness.” \"But Selfish devotion leads nowhere..\" \"I must practice selfless devotion.\" This is the first awakening. As his devotion deepens, he understands: “My devotion must be without desire.” Whoever his chosen deity is, whoever he worships with love he now realizes that his devotion must be selfless, without any demands. This is the very first stage - the primary stage. The first insight: “My devotion must be selfless. I must ask for nothing.” “Whatever the Divine gives me, I accept, but I’ll never let go of His devotion.\" “Be it heaven or hell, suffering or comforts - I shall not abandon devotion.\" “Because now I know, only unconditional devotion is true devotion.” \"Desireless devotion is true devotion.\" He reaches that first stage though he hasn’t yet fully achieved it - He is trying. He begins to practice Nishkaam Bhakti And yet, whenever he compares his bhakti to that of Tukaram Maharaj, To Namdev Maharaj, to Jnaneshwar Maharaj he finds himself lacking. A yearning awakens in him: “When will that kind of true devotion awaken in me?” his journey is progressing and deepening. Then he realizes: Without purification of the mind (chitta-shuddhi), you cannot have the devotion of Sant Jnaneshwar or Tukaram. Purity of mind is essential. So, “How do I purify my mind?” And he discovers: By practicing Nishkama Karma Yoga. That alone purifies the inner being. So now he learns the first yoga And the journey began with simple devotion, He realizes: “Unless I live selfless action in my life, my devotion will not deepen.” \"Only then can I aspire to the bhakti of Jnaneshwar Maharaj\" Scriptures say there are three impurities in the being Mal, Vikshep, and Aavaran We are filled with three impurities. The three Supreme Ailments Mal, Vikshep and Aavaran Mal means inner impurity - all the negative tendencies, all-together is Mal. In Chapter 16 of the Sai Satcharitra To overcome these three afflictions, first, mala must be cleansed - through selfless action. If there are three illnesses, then three remedies have also been given So, impurity(Mal) is destroyed through selfless action Second is, Vikshep means restlessness of mind. Not even for a moment is the mind still. Not even for a second does it find peace. Even when one sits to meditate, the mind wanders. I merely perform the outer practice each day But true meditation never happens Because mind is restless, as Vikshep still exists in the mind And until you remove that Vikshep, you cannot truly meditate. To remove vikshep, the answer is Upasana(Spiritual practice) And Upasana means, the ninefold devotion. In Sai Satcharitra’s Chapter 21, a character appears - Anantrao Patankar. He has studied the entire Vedas, absorbed all the Upanishads, understood the scriptures thoroughly. And yet, his mind cannot remain still, even for a moment. He comes to Baba and says: “Baba, I’ve heard that you grant people, samadhi, in an instant. “Despite all my effort, I cannot still my mind even for a second.” Baba narrates to him a strange tale \"What's the big deal in this? He says - there was a merchant. He owned a mare. The mare passed nine stools. The merchant was action-oriented. He rushed, gathered those nine droppings in his garment, clutched them to his heart, and in that moment, his mind became completely still. Anantrao Patankar is bewildered. “What is this story? I came to this man believing him to be a great yogi. I thought he would give me some key, teach me how to meditate - and instead he shares this bizarre tale about a mare and her nine droppings!” Then Anantrao Patankar asks Dada Kirtankar - one of Baba’s oldest devotees \"What did Baba just say? What did I even ask, and what kind of answer did He give? Is this how your Baba usually speaks? He speaks in such profound language\" He gets into trouble by hearing this, Baba increased his trouble, as he narrated him such a tale that he wasn't able to understand Then Dada Kirtankar tells him: “Look, the language of Baba is extremely profound But through years of association with Him, I have come to understand this much - That merchant - he is the seeker ready to pay any price. And the mare - she is the Divine Grace of God. She passed nine droppings - meaning, nine lumps of dung. And he gathered those nine lumps to his chest. That dung symbolizes the nine forms of devotion - Navavidha Bhakti. So, until our mind becomes absorbed in those nine forms of devotion, until they enter our life, This is known as Upasana Upasana means Navavidha Bhakti - nine characteristics of devotion And in this, we practically enter into worship, into Archan Because our body, mind, and wealth - all three are involved. This is called trikarana shuddhi In meditation, all three often do not engage. Something remains held back. So, if true inner purification is needed, then body, mind, and wealth must all be surrendered to the Divine. And this only happens in Navavidha Bhakti. When your mind begins to rest in Navavidha Bhakti, the restlessness of your mind will begin to dissolve. That means the second affliction will be healed. Now this devotee begins to understand Yes, the first defect was Mal, and Mal is removed through selfless action. But, forget performing selfless action in the world, we can’t even practice it at home! Even there, we find ourselves thinking - ‘I do so much for you, can’t you do this little for me?’ At home. How will we ever live selfless action in the outside world? So, these are the three defects, Mal, Vikshep, and Aavaran. Mal is removed through selfless action And look, this is practical spirituality, not theoretical. If there are three diseases, then three yogas are needed as remedies. First, Selfless action to eliminate Mal Upasana or Bhakti Yoga to remove Vikshep And the third is Aavaran, that remains even after mala and vikshepa are gone. “I am not the body, I am the soul”, this knowledge remains covered until the veil is removed. To remove that veil, just one Mahavakya, uttered into the ear by the Sadguru, or even declared in a gathering “You are the Supreme Brahman”, and in that very moment, one becomes Brahman, because Mal and Vikshep have already been eliminated. Baba says in the Sai Satcharita: Even to meditate, true knowledge is required. If the true awareness of the soul has not awakened in the heart, if clarity has not dawned, then how can one meditate on the Supreme? One must first have the true knowledge of that Supreme Form so that meditation can even begin. So, before dhyana, comes jnana complete awareness of the Self. And when does that complete awareness arise? Only after Mal and Vikshep have been removed If Mal and Vikshep are still present, then even if you take millions of births, you will not attain complete awareness. Our problem is this - I speak some bitter truths. Our greatest weakness is: Neither has our Mal been removed, nor our Vikshep, And yet we sit down directly for meditation. Even if we take countless births, we will not attain spiritual realization This is a very serious matter. Let me give an example, Imagine a piece of iron. But I cover the piece of iron, entirely in a thick layer of clay, It is completely covered by clay, And I'm placing a magnet besides it, will it stick? Even if you try to stick the magnet to it, it won’t adhere. Our meditation is like that. The mind is covered in the clay of Mal and Vikshep and we keep trying to meditate, we are trying to stick the magnet, keep trying - but it will not stick. We are deceiving ourselves. But when a Sadguru arrives, and he begins to rub that clay off with nishkama karma and upasana, then even if the magnet is kept far - once cleaned, it will instantly adhere. And that is when true meditation begins. So, unless mala and vikshepa are removed, dhyana is not possible. Now the Aavaran, Aavaran is eliminated, at the very moment when the Mahavakya is addressed, as Mal and Vikshep are already removed. It’s only a matter of the Mahavakya being directly addressed - by the Sadguru, by a spiritualyy eligible person. it pierces straight into his heart, and meditation begins So, that is Aavaran, it is removed through jnana. Now see, when all three are removed, then true Brahman meditation begins 'Kitakisahi bhramar dhyan, thene ti labhe bhramar pan' Even a small insect, if it keeps revolving around the flower long enough, eventually it becomes the flower and flies off in complete transformation. Likewise, a simple jivatma, once mal, vikshep, and aavaran are removed, begins to meditate upon the Supreme - and becomes the Supreme. And understand- Atma-jnana and Tattva-jnana are two distinct things. After self-realization (atma-jnana), comes realization of the essence of all (tattva-jnana) 'adhyātma-jñāna-nityatvaṁ tattva-jñānārtha-darśhanam'- Bhagavad Gita, Chapter 13 Just intellectually understanding “I am the soul”, that is one thing. But to experience “I alone pervade the entire universe” - that is something else entirely. There are two types of realized beings in this world. 99.99% are those who have experienced the Self, and even that is very rare 0.01% are those who have completely known that \"I am not the body; I am the soul\", at an intellectual level, are atma-jnanis. But a tattva-jnani is one who not only realizes the Self, but also experiences that this very Self pervades all creation, and \"I am that\", everywhere, beyond time, space, and causation, their consciousness expands across the universe. That is the 'tattva jnana', the complete knowledge - Purna Jnana Saints like Jnaneshwar Maharaj, Sai Baba, Akkalkot Maharaj - are tattva-jnanis. And in the Sai Satcharita, it is said: Sai Baba is an avatar of tattva-jnana. Which means if Baba sees that spark in someone, If he sees that honestly, sincerity, then Baba says, “I can take you to the very end of the Ultimate Truth.” If this is Baba’s promise, then it proves that avatars are not exclusively God descending again and again. Rather, a jivatma, through the power of their integrity, attains completion and that very jivatma one day returns to this world as an avatar. If this is not the case then the word “Advaita” should never have existed in the scriptures Our problem is that, We are small-hearted people and so, we’ve made even God seem small-hearted. Really, we do not understand His vastness, the magnanimity of His heart. What He wants to give us, Their heart is so vast, our minds cannot comprehend it. So, look a person who had started his journey with simple devotion. Now, through true meditation, has reached the knowledge of the essence And after attaining tattva-jnana, if his heart held the resolve- That the knowledge I received from my Master made me capable of reaching this completeness. Similarly, I want to bestow this knowledge upon others. If such a resolve arises, and they choose to return, then that same person comes back as an Avatar. Because the grace his Guru bestowed upon him, dwells in every vein of his body \"I was once just an ordinary devotee,\" \"but carved, refined and shaped was transformed into an embodiment of the Supreme.\" \"Similarly, unless I bring a few others to that same Supreme state, my own realization feels incomplete.\" If such a vow arises within him and he choose to return That same soul takes birth again as an Avatar. So this idea that the same comes, the same goes No. That’s wrong. But God cannot be so small, And if He is that limited - then He’s not God. So, this is Advaita. Even after gathering such immense knowledge When that soul returns, it will come as a fakir, like Baba. He will come as an embodiment of devotion. Because, all the divine knowledge is within But, He will appear to the world only as devotion incarnate To uplift you all. To transform ordinary seekers into realized beings To make them an Avatari. So, the journey begins with devotion and ends in devotion. Take Sai Baba, Akkalkot Maharaj, or Gajanan Maharaj - They are Avatars of devotion. And yet, they are overflowing with Karma Yoga overflowing with Bhakti Yoga, overflowing with Jnana Yoga, and overflowing with Raja Yoga. Still, they arrive as simple devotees, Do their divine work, and depart from the world. In truth, they are complete Avatars. Because, they are Poorna Avatar. In Chapter 20 of Sai Satcharitra, there is Verse, 'Purnabrahmaswaroopchut, aisa ha jivatama purvavat,' Listen carefully 'Purnabrahmaswaroopchut, aisa ha jivatama purvavat,' 'Kadhitari swaswarupaprat, pavava nishchit he dhyeya.' What does this verse mean? That the soul descended from the Supreme Brahman And the goal is not just to become a soul with knowledge But to return to the state of Complete Brahman (tattva-jnani). Baba has the capacity to give that The real question is - do we have the capacity to receive it? 'Purnabrahmaswaroopchut, aisa ha jivatama purvavat,' 'Kadhitari swaswarupaprat, pavava nishchit he dhyeya.' And that is the aim of life, of the soul. To return to the same Supreme Brahman from which it once descended. That is the only true objective of existence, or else this life is meaningless. If we consider this verse, Then truly, who becomes an Avatar? You think on that And if this isn't the truth, then discard the word 'Advaita' from the scriptures. Because otherwise, it becomes a dictatorship of the Divine \"I myself will send Maya, the Maya creates chaos and unrighteousness, then I'll come, fix it all and depart again.\" Is this a game? Why such drama? God cannot be so petty. He cannot be so shallow. His heart is vast. But we have made Him petty. Because of our limited vision - our narrow view. Today, in just these 20 minutes, we’ve seen the entire journey of spirituality It begins with simple devotion moves to knowledge of the essence. and then returns as an ordinary devotee So, the journey begins with devotion and ends in devotion. If you understand this topic deeply, we will understand the Avatar of Sai Baba, we will understand the purpose of Akkalkot Maharaj’s Avatar, And that of Gajanan Maharaj. But what do we do? We lack clarity. So we cling to famous personalities from each 'branch'. Sudarshan Kriya, that kriya, this kriya - what is all this? We hang on to one branch and stick to it, But Vedanta speaks of roots! We must walk the path of roots. But our problem is, we don’t have the patience To do Nishkama Karma Yoga, Or practice the Nine-fold devotion So, we seek shortcuts. But our mindset is even more flawed. We want to do minimal spiritual effort, yet receive the same result others get from intense striving! It doesn't work like that. Only the one who labors deeply and sincerely, will reach that divine state. Sometimes people stumble due to lack of clarity But once they gain it, they awaken They have that spark. There are many people sitting here - I don’t know in whose heart Baba might ignite that fire today. If even one person’s heart is lit - Then this talk is a success And if not today, then maybe tomorrow, If someone hears this on YouTube and says \"Oh my God—this is how an Avatar descends!\" Yes, this is how it happens A soul becomes the Supreme And then returns as an Avatar Only that is true divinity His heart is truly vast, And if not, then I do not accept him as a God. This is how it goes: The journey begins with simple devotion But, then gradually..... it keeps increasing and one walks into Nishkama Karma Yoga then into Upasana (worship) the veils begin to fall and at some point, they become worthy of meditating upon the Supreme Brahman. Even becoming eligible to meditate on Him is no small feat But that requires every impurity, Mal, Vikshep - to fall Only then does the form of Brahman appear within Only then does true meditation begin. And meditation is not something you do. It happens. It’s not an act - it’s spontaneous. But, atleast you must have the clarity, that even if someone gives us a method Then it is just a practice which we are doing. But, only with purity of mind, can real meditation arise That much clarity is essential. For that, a person needs to be inclined towards his basics. It is like, we are not able to detach from the five sensory pleasures, then how will we meditate? Until these cravings for the five senses drop, Meditation will never happen. It’s impossible. Again, if the iron is covered with mud, still wants to stick to the magnet. It won't stick. You must scrape off the layers of dirt first. Now look, even if we try to stick an iron covered in mud with a magnet. Still it remains detached, because the mud is in between. So, our meditation is like that. But if we fall into the hands of a true Guru and he begins the cleansing - Then, no need to keep the iron piece close to the magnet, even from a distance it goes and sticks. Meditation begins. Then, true meditation begins. Otherwise, we are just deceiving ourselves. And time will pass. 'Vishayi jayasi havyas' Shri Sai Satcharitra Chapter 24 'Vishayi jayasi havyas, Parmarth na dhari tayachi aas' What a beautiful verse! 'Tayavari jo ghalil kaas, Tayacha das parmarth' It is said, 'Tayacha das parmarth' What a word! If our minds are full of thoughts, all the time. \"What to eat, what to wear, how to look, what to do,..\" If you are trapped in all this show and pretence, then where is the space for meditation? And our tendency is, we don’t want to reduce our indulgence at all. Instead, we want more pleasure - day by day. And still expect to meditate! It is impossible. It’s like boarding a train to Kolkata But expecting to arrive in Kashmir. You have boarded a train to Kolkata, But, you want to reach Kashmir. How is that possible? You want to keep indulging endlessly You want to enjoy it completely, and at the same time expect deep meditation. It won’t happen. Or it’ll take lifetimes And even then, in one lifetime, the Master Himself may have to come and correct him forcefully, saying, “Let go of these worldly indulgences.” The poor soul has done so much meditation that now the Master feels, “I must straighten him out, even if it takes some blows,” because the effort hasn’t gone unnoticed - the Master has seen it. Still, when done with clarity and understanding, it is more better. If our spiritual practice is rightly directed, Nothing can stop us from attaining completeness. But if we lack clarity and do it halfway, It’ll be difficult. That’s why today’s topic was: 'Begins with Devotion, Ends in Devotion.' It means, even a perfect Guru like Baba, Knower of all Yogas Still appears to the world as a simple Fakir. like this. And this entire journey is Vedanta. It moves through Mal, Vikshep, and Aavaran. It sheds every flaw. And attains completeness. Then that very soul returns as an Avatar to the world. This is how Avatars come. Sometimes, look - Within a 25-year span, Swami Samarth, Sai Baba, and Shegaon Bhajan Maharaj all arrived together. All were complete manifestations. But after there Era, it’s been over a hundred years. Not even one has come. If it were God’s direct intervention, He’d have sent someone every 50 years. No, it is not like that. So, even th Divine will wait now for a soul to reach the level, to return as an Avatar. Or else, He would have come at definite intervals, every 50 years But has this ever happened. Back then, perhaps 3 or 4 Avatars came together, or else not a single one. What does this mean? That not a single individual soul reached that position to return as an Avatar. How clear is that? Back then, perhaps 3 or 4 reached it together, And so they all descended at once. In the verse, “Yada yada hi dharmasya glanir bhavati bharata…” God says - “O individual soul, attain that state of absolute completeness and you yourself shall reign.\" And this is a service, If you wish to serve others, then go forth. God’s heart is surely vast enough for that. I hope the concept of 'Avatar' is now clear. O Mind-Enchanting One, Remover of Curses and Suffering, Destroyer of Ignorance, Bestower of Liberation, The Supreme Giver of Auspiciousness, Embodiment of Truth, Consciousness, and Bliss, the Sacred Mother of countless embodiments of Sai. the True Form of Sai Himself Victory to the Divine Scripture: Shri Sai Satcharita.",
    "Description": "🍁Do Avatars descend from the heavens… or are they born among us?\n🍁Can an ordinary human, through intense spiritual discipline, truly become Narayan?\n🍁Were saints like Sai Baba and Swami Samarth once individual souls who attained ultimate completeness?\nIn this deeply stirring and revelatory talk, Krishnaji unveils a profound spiritual truth that may forever shift your understanding.\nHe reveals that an Avatar is not a miraculous anomaly, but the natural culmination of a soul’s complete evolution.\nThe journey that begins with devotion gradually moves through the layers of impurity, restlessness, and ignorance—until the seeker becomes fit for true meditation, where meditation doesn’t have to be done—it simply happens.\n📿 This is not just a satsang... it is a silent spiritual revolution.\n👉 Discover how “It is man himself who becomes Narayan and takes Avatar”—and ask yourself:\nAm I on that path, too?\nOm Sai Ram\n\n----------------------\n0:00 Introduction\n0:22 Who Incarnates as an Avatar? What is Advaita?\n6:47 Journey of a Jivatama to Paramatama:\n7:13 1. Selfish to selfless devotion\n8:58 2. Chitta Shuddhi- Mal, Vikshep, Avaran\n19:30 3. Aatmagyani and Tatvagyani\n21:37 4. Reincarnation to liberate others\n23:01 Sampurna Avatar\n28:50 Key Takeaways\n----------------------\n\n🍁क्या अवतार ऊपर से आते हैं... या हमारे बीच से ही जन्म लेते हैं?\n🍁क्या कोई साधारण मनुष्य, अपनी साधना से स्वयं नारायण बन सकता है?\n🍁क्या साईं बाबा, स्वामी समर्थ जैसे अवतारी पुरुष वास्तव में पूर्णता को प्राप्त जीवात्माएँ थीं?\nइस रहस्यपूर्ण और अत्यंत मार्मिक प्रवचन में कृष्णाजी एक ऐसी आध्यात्मिक गहराई खोलते हैं जो आपके दृष्टिकोण को ही बदल सकती है।\nवो बताते हैं कि अवतार कोई चमत्कारी घटना नहीं, बल्कि एक जीव की पूर्णता की परिणति है।\nभक्ति से शुरू होनेवाली यह यात्रा, कैसे धीरे-धीरे मल, विक्षेप, आवरण जैसे आंतरिक पर्दों को हटाते हुए उस शिखर तक पहुंचती है जहाँ ध्यान होता नहीं—होता है।\n📿 यह सिर्फ एक सत्संग नहीं... एक मौन क्रांति है।\n👉 जानिए कैसे “नर ही नारायण बनके अवतार लेता है”—और क्या आप भी उस राह पर हैं?\nॐ साई राम\n\nReferences:\n• यदा यदा हि धर्मस्य ग्लानिर्भवति भारत । अभ्युत्थानमधर्मस्य तदात्मानं सृजाम्यहम् ॥४-७॥\n        परित्राणाय साधूनां विनाशाय च दुष्कृताम् । धर्मसंस्थापनार्थाय सम्भवामि युगे युगे ॥४-८॥– Bhagavad Gita\n• अध्यात्मज्ञाननित्यत्वं तत्वज्ञानार्थदर्शनम् |\n        एतज्ज्ञानमिति प्रोक्तमज्ञानं यदतोऽन्यथा || 12||- Bhagavad Gita\n• मल-विक्षेप आणि आवरण । ऐसें त्रिदोषी अंत:करण । निष्काम कर्में मल-निर्मूलन । विक्षेप - क्षालन उपासना ॥१६७॥              Adhyay 16- Shri Sai Satcharitra\n• पूर्णब्रम्हस्वरूपच्युत । ऐसा हा जीवात्मा पूर्ववत । कधींतरी स्वस्वरूपाप्रत । पावावा निश्चित हें ध्येय ॥११२॥ Adhyay    20- Shri Sai Satcharitra\n• विषयीं जयासी हव्यास । परमार्थ न धरी तयाची आस । तयांवरी जो घालील कास । तयाचा दास परमार्थ ॥४३॥  Adhyay 24- Shri Sai Satcharitra\n\n#saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #shirdisaibaba #saisatcharitra #spiritualism#millennials #saileela #saibabateachings #saidarshan #youtube #shraddha #saburi #spiritualwisdom #krishnaji #bhaktipath #vedanticwisdom #chandpatilstory #saibabachillum #saiarrivalshirdi #innerjourney  #divinegrace #saikripa #saidevotees #saispiritualtalk #corespirituality #saileelarahasya #trending #like #comment #share #explore …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "2,765 views",
    "Likes": "209"
  },
  {
    "Title": "त्रिगुण क्या है ? तमोगुण रजोगुण सत्त्वगुण",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v1KkkTWR-dg",
    "Transcript": "[संगीत] [संगीत] आज टॉपिक ले रहा हूं त्रिगुण त्रिगुण किसे कहते हैं क्योंकि चरित्र में बार-बार त्रिगुण की बात आती है तीन गुण इंसान में तीन गुण बसा हुआ है सत्व गुण रजोगुण और तमोगुण यह तीन गुणों की बात जो होती है हर व्यक्ति में य तीन गुण मौजूद है किसी में किसी की प्रधानता ज्यादा है तो किसी में किसी गुण का प्रधानता ज्यादा है एक व्यक्ति में रजोगुण बहुत ज्यादा हो सकता है और तमोगुण और सत्व गुण थोड़ा कम हो सकता है और एक व्यक्ति में सत्व गुण बहुत 70 पर हो सकता है और 30 पर जो है वह तमोगुण और रजोगुण हो सकता है और एक व्यक्ति में 70 पर तमोगुण हो सकता है और 30 पर में मतलब रजोगुण और सत्व गुण हो सकता है तो यह ऐसे त्रि गुणों से हर व्यक्ति बना है तीन गुणों से ही हर व्यक्ति का जन्म हुआ है जन्म लेते समय ही यह तीन गुण लेकिन पिछले जन्म में उसने जैसी साधना की होगी जैसा जीवन जिया होगा उस हिसाब से यह गुण लेकर के यह संसार में आता है तो हर व्यक्ति की अभिव्यक्ति अलग है हर व्यक्ति की जो त्रिगुण की साम्यावस्था है वह अलग-अलग है कोई व्यक्ति तमोगुण प्रधान है कोई व्यक्ति रजोगुण प्रधान है तो कोई व्यक्ति सत्व गुणी प्रधान है तो यह तीन गुण पहले अच्छे से अगर समझ में आ जाए तो तमोगुण से रजोगुण की तरफ यात्रा होनी चाहिए और फिर रजोगुण से सत्व गुण की तरफ यात्रा होनी चाहिए और सत्व गुण से निर्गुण की तरफ यात्रा होनी चाहिए इस वजह से यह मानव देह मिला है यह जो आप देख रहे हैं वह तीनों गुण जो है एक दूसरे में समाहित है इसलिए जो ब्लैक में है उसको तमोगुण बोला गया है और जो रेड है वह रजोगुण है और जो वाइट है जो सफेद है वह सत्व गुण है और यह तीनों भी हर इंसान में मौजूद है लेकिन किसकी प्रधानता किस व्यक्ति में ज्यादा है यह हर व्यक्ति की अभिव्यक्ति अलग है वह हमारी अंतरात्मा को जब तक समझ में ना आए कि मैं रजोगुण व्यक्ति हूं या मैं सत्व गुणी व्यक्ति हूं या मैं तमोगुण हूं तो फिर पुरुषार्थ नहीं कर पाएगा साधना नहीं कर पाएगा तो यह तीन गुणों की बात मतलब वेदों से लेकर के भगवत गीता से लेकर के उपनिषदों से लेकर के हर गंत में इसकी बात आती है त्रिगुण और यह तीन गुण जो है हर इंसान में मौजूद है अभी देखिए जो व्यक्ति तमोगुण से भरा पड़ा है उसका जीवन का मकसद जो है खूब पैसे कमाना बहुत ज्यादा पैसा कमाना और बहुत ज्यादा भोग भोगना यह तमोगुण व्यक्ति का जीवन है मतलब उसमें तमोगुण प्रधान है उसको पैसे कमाने के अलावा और लाइफ को लविली एंजॉय करने के अलावा दूसरा कोई चीज सूझता नहीं है उसका जीवन सिमट के रह जाता है पैसा कमाने में भोग भोगने में उसकी जिंदगी डाइनिंग टेबल पर शुरू होती है और बेडरूम में वासना के तहत खत्म हो जाती है और उसके लिए खूब मेहनत करता है खूब पैसा कमाता है और वह है तमोगुण व्यक्ति तमोगुण प्रधान है वह सोचता ही है कि जितना ज्यादा पैसे कमाऊ उतना ज्यादा लविश लाइफ जी पाऊंगा उतना ज्यादा आरामदायक जीवन जिऊंगा उतना ज्यादा कंफर्टेबल जीवन जिऊंगा उतना ज्यादा भोग को भोग सकूंगा उतना ज्यादा लाइफ को एंजॉय कर सकूंगा वह है तमोगुण व्यक्ति अब दूसरा जो है रजोगुण व्यक्ति रजोगुण व्यक्ति जो है वह भी कमाता है नहीं ऐसा नहीं है लेकिन भोग की प्रधानता उसमें बहुत कम होती है इसलिए लालच कम होता है वह व्यक्ति में जिस कि भोग प्रधानता जितना ज्यादा होता है वह उतना ज्यादा पैसा कमाने का सोचता है इसका मतलब यह नहीं है कि पैसा नहीं कमाना चाहिए मैं एक बात साफ कर दूं तो बार-बार मैं यह बात बोल रहा हूं कि पैसा कमाना गलत नहीं है अगर पैसा नहीं कमाएंगे तो जी नहीं पाएंगे मां लक्ष्मी का बहुत बड़ा हाथ है य संसार में उनके बगैर तो संत का जीवन भी नहीं चलता तो तो मैं लक्ष्मी के खिलाफ नहीं हूं मैं पैसे के खिलाफ नहीं हूं मैं खिलाफ हूं भोग वृत्ति के तो क्या है समझो एक व्यक्ति है एक करोड़ रुपया महीने का कमाता है और वह एक करोड़ रुपया एक महीने में भोग और विलासिता में खर्च कर देता है आसमान से सफर करता है लविश लाइफ जी है बड़े-बड़े गाड़ियां रखता है बड़े-बड़े रिसोर्ट रखता है बड़े-बड़े बंगले रखता है साल में चार बार वर्ल्ड टूर पर जाता है या बड़े-बड़े टूर पर जाता है उसने एक करोड़ रुपया कमाया एक करोड़ रुपया पूरा भोग और विलासिता में खर्च किया मैं उसे तमोगुण कहूंगा अगर भोग वृत्ति है तो लेकिन अभी देखिए हमारे देश में रतन टाटा जी है जितना वह कमाते हैं जितने करोड़ ऑफ रुपीस व कमाते हैं उसमें 70 टू 80 टू 90 पर चैरिटी में जाता है ऐसे लोग भी हमारे हिंदुस्तान में है और यह हमारा सौभाग्य है मतलब कमाना बुरा नहीं है कमाने के बाद अगर 100 करोड़ रुप कमाता हूं मैं अगर मेरी एक महीने की दिनचर्या जितना सिंपल होगा मुझे उतना कम पैसा लगेगा तो एक करोड़ में अगर मेरा 200 हज में महीने का गुजारा हो जाता है तो बाकी पैसे अगर मैं विराट की सेवा में लगाता हूं तो वह सत्व गुणी तो सवाल पैसा नहीं कमाना चाहिए ऐसा नहीं है अगर किसी में इमेंस टैलेंट है किसी में बहुत ज्यादा हुनर है कोई एक्टर है कोई आर्टिस्ट है बहुत पैसे लेता है बहुत पैसा चार्ज करता है करे वह उसका हुनर का कीमत है जो उसे मिल रहा है उसकी मेहनत है उसके पीछे जो उसे मिल रहा है लेकिन सवाल यह है कि वह मिलने के बाद अगर उसको अपनी भोग अपनी विलासिता में अगर वह खर्च कर देता है तो वह तमोगुण हो जाता है एकदम सूक्ष्म बात लेकिन अगर वही पैसा अगर वह चैरिटी में खर्च करता है लोगों की सेवा में खर्च करता है और अपना जीवन को सादगी से बिताता है तो वह व्यक्ति इस धरती पर भगवान ही है विष्णु ही है याद रखना विष्णु कोई स्वर्ग में नहीं बसता रतन टाटा जैसे लोग ही विष्णु है संसार के जो भी लोग कमाया इतना कि जिसकी कोई सीमा नहीं है लेकिन देते समय भी उतने ही बड़े हाथों से दिया तो यह सब लोग जो है यह सत्व गुण के कैरेक्टर में आते हैं और रतन टाटा जैसे लोग इस जन्म में जो उन्होंने यह काम किए हैं अगला जन्म में उनका अध्यात्म को कोई नहीं रोक पाएगा अगला स्टेज अध्यात्म ही है और वो भी कोई साधारण अध्यात्म नहीं होगा बाबा के कोटि तक पहुंचेंगे वो तो यह खासियत है तो मैं पैसे के खिलाफ नहीं हूं क्योंकि मैं बार-बार यह बात बोलता हूं तो कई बार लोगों को ऐसा लगता है कि इंसान पैसा क्यों कमाता है तो फैमिली का भरण पोषण करना यह अनिवार्य है लेकिन कितना कितने में आप अपने आप को सिमट सकते हो वह ज्यादा जरूरी है मैं अगर 500 कमाता हूं लेकिन अगर मेरा 5000 में अगर गुजर बसर मैं कर लूं उतना सादगी का जिंदगी अगर मैं बसर करू और मैं अगर 45000 र अगर मैं विराट की सेवा में लगा दूं तो इससे बढ़कर जीवन नहीं हो सकता तो बात यह है कि आप कमाते कितना है यह नहीं क्योंकि नॉर्मली क्या होता है 99.99% लोग जो पैसा कमाते हैं अपनी खुशी अपने भोग अपने वैभव के लिए कमाते हैं अपनी अयाशी के लिए कमाते हैं मैं अ यह वर्ड इस्तेमाल करूंगा अयाशी तो पैसा कमाना गलत नहीं है लेकिन पैसे का इस्तेमाल कहां करते हैं कैसा करते हैं सवा उसका है तो यह हो गया तमोगुण व्यक्ति अब रजोगुण व्यक्ति जो है वह पैसा कमाता है भोग भोगता है वह भी लेकिन फिर भी वक्त पड़े तो अपना वेतन का बड़े से बड़ा हिस्सा किसी नेक काज के लिए देते समय एक पल के लिए भी सोचता नहीं है वह है रजोगुण और रजोगुण व्यक्ति का जीवन जो है वह डाइनिंग टेबल तक सीमित नहीं रहता वह बेडरूम तक सीमित नहीं रहता बेडरूम का मतलब है वह वासना तक सीमित नहीं रहता तमोगुण जो है बेडरूम वासना और डाइनिंग टेबल यहीं पर यह पूरी जीवन जो है वह घिस जाती है पिस जाती है लेकिन जो रजोगुण व्यक्ति है इसका मतलब यह नहीं है कि वोह वासना उसमें नहीं होती है लेकिन होती है लेकिन उस परे कंट्रोल होता है वो व्यक्ति के जीवन में केवल भोग जो स्थूल भोग है स्थूल भोग नहीं होता जैसे कि तमोगुण में होता है वोह व्यक्ति के जीवन में उससे भी थोड़ा ऊपर उठने की क्षमता होती है उसको म्यूजिक में दिलचस्पी आता है उसको कविताओं में दिलचस्पी आता है उसको किसी आट में अपना रुझान होता है उसका तो उसकी गहराई उसके हृदय को छूने लगती है और चूंकि आठ जो फॉर्म है कला जिसको कहते हैं सरस्वती जिसे कहते हैं सारी कलाओं की जननी है और अगर कोई भी किसी भी कला का प्रेमी हो किसी को म्यूजिक भा सकता है तो किसी को कविता भा सकती है और फिल्मों में ना मुझे फिल्म क्यों पसंद है मैं आपको बताता हूं फिल्मों में यह सारी चीजें कूटकूट के भरी होती है बस नजरिया चाहिए अगर फिल्म का एक बेहतरीन सीन अगर आपके हृदय को छू ले फिल्म का या कोई भी एक गीत उसका म्यूजिक उसकी लिखावट उसकी बनावट अगर आपके हृदय को छू ले तो आप तमोगुण से थोड़ा ऊपर उठ गए आप रजोगुण पर आ गए क्योंकि जिसके जीवन में यह सूक्ष्म कला के प्रति आकर्षण है वह स्थूल भोग में ज्यादा नहीं फस सकता व डेफिनेटली व ऊपर उठेगा जिसकी कला में रुचि है डाइनिंग टेबल के बारे में नहीं सोचेगा ज्यादा नहीं सोचेगा मेरा कहने का मतलब है इसका मतलब यह भी नहीं है कि हर कला प्रेमी मतलब फूड से नफरत करता है ऐसा नहीं है लेकिन फिर भी उसका रुझान ज्यादा नहीं होगा अगर दो चीजें अगर चुनने का समय आ जाए तो सीधा कला के तरफ जाएगा फूड को गिरा देगा इतनी ताकत वह व्यक्ति में होती है तो वह व्यक्ति है रजोगुण और है सत्व गुण सत्व गुण याने जिसको सिर्फ धर्म और नीति भाती है उसको तो ना यह संसार का नश्वर भोग पसंद आता है ना ही यह कला कला के प्रति उसको रेस्पेक्ट जरूर होता है लेकिन कला से भी ऊपर उठकर के जो धर्म है जो नीति है जो श्रेय है उसके प्रति उसकी रुन इतनी होती है कि वक्त पड़े तो कला को भी गिरा देगा और भोग तो उसको छू ही नहीं सकता वह है सत्व गुणी व्यक्ति तो यह जो डायमेंशन है यह हर व्यक्ति में मौजूद है लेकिन किसका रुझान किसमें ज्यादा है और कभी भी देखना जिसका जीवन डाइनिंग टेबल पर शुरू होता है और बेडरूम में खत्म होता है वह व्यक्ति जब भी जीवन में जब कोई विकट प्रसंग आ जाए अनबन हो जाए तो आदमी गाली गलोज पर उतरेगा हाता पाई पर उतरेगा यह तमोगुण का लक्षण है और अगर रजोगुण व्यक्ति है पत्थर डाल कर के आपने शरवानी पर छीट नहीं उड़ाए वह हाथ जोड़ेगा बोलेगा यहां पर यह गलत लोग है अपना रास्ता नापेगा भले वक्त पड़े तो माफी मांग लेगा लेकिन निकल जाएगा लेकिन वो गाली गलोज तक नहीं पहुंचेगा इस रजोगुण व्यक्ति का ये ये है और अगर सत्व गुनी है जो लाख गाली दे कोई व्यक्ति एक जबान से शब्द नहीं निकलेगा उसके उसको बड़े दिल से माफ कर देगा और आगे बढ़ेगा मेरे को जीसस का एक प्रसंग याद आ रहा है सत्व गुण इससे बढ़कर क्या हो सकता है जीसस को एक गलत कारण के वजह से उन्होंने सिर्फ अधर्म का विरोध किया एक चर्च था चर्च में अभी जैसा फॉर एग्जांपल य मंदिर है यहां पर क्या होना चाहिए भजन कीर्तन नामस्मरण सत्संग यही होना चाहिए ना लेकिन अगर कल यहां पर आकर के कोई बंदा मच्छी का बाजार लगा मास काट के बेचने के लिए रख दे यहां पर तो यह मंदिर का अपमान है या नहीं वैसा ही चर्च में हो रहा था एक चर्च को बिजनेस का मरकज बना दिया था बहुत लोगों ने तो जीसस ने उसका विरोध किया जो भी ठेले लगाकर बैठे थे वह जा जा कर के उठा उठा के फेंक देता है बोला तुमने इस देवालय को इस चर्च को तुमने बिजनेस बना दिया बस वह एक गुनाह के चलते और जो वह प्रीच करते थे मैं वह ईश्वर का बेटा हूं वगैरह जो बोलते थे वह लोगों को नहीं अच्छा लगा और उनका यह कारनामा तो लोगों के सर पर चला गया और लोग उनके विरोध में आ गए उनको क्रूसिफिकेशन अगर हो सका तो मैं चाहूंगा कि आप जरूर देखे द पैशन ऑफ क्राइस्ट इंग्लिश में मूवी है एक एक शब्द ठहर के समझ के देखने का प्रयास कीजिएगा मैं ऐसा कहता हूं कि संसार के 10 बेहतरीन मूवीज में से एक है द पैशन ऑफ क्राइस्ट तो अभी उनको क्रूसिफिकेशन मंदिर में यह गलत काम नहीं होने चाहिए उसका विरोध किया उसके चलते उनको क्रूसिफिकेशन देना कहीं इनका कृति देख कर के आपको गुस्सा ना आ जाए तो यह नादान है यह अनजान है कि यह क्या कर रहे हैं यह नहीं जानते हैं तो आप प्लीज इनका कृति देख कर के कहीं आप नाराज ना होना और आप इनको कहीं बददुआ ना देना तो इनको माफ कर देना इससे बढ़कर सत्व गुण क्या हो सकता है इससे बढ़कर सत्व गुण क्या हो सकता है देखिए मैं यहां बाबा का सत्संग करने के लिए बैठा हुआ जो चीजें अच्छी होंगी वह मैं आपके सामने रखूंगा क्योंकि वह चीजें मेरे हृदय को भा गई है और बाबा ने मुझे यह सिखाया है कि हर धर्म में बहुत अच्छाइयां है उसे स्वीकार ले कृष्णा और वही बात आपके सामने रख रहा हूं जो कट्टरवादी लोग है शायद उसको मेरी यह बातें अच्छा ना लगे और मुझे फर्क नहीं पड़ता तो खीले ठोके जा रहे हैं हाथ में लहू बह रहा है और उनके बारे में विषमता नहीं है हृदय में बल्कि ऊपर मालिक के तरफ देख कर के प्रार्थना निकलती है कि हे मालिक इनका यह कृति देख कर के इनका यह कारनामा देख कर के कहीं आप इन पर क्रोधित ना हो जाना इन्हें माफ करना यह नहीं जानते हैं यह क्या कर रहे हैं इसीलिए जीसस भगवान है तो यह है तमोगुण रजोगुण और सत्व गुण और यह तीनों गुण हम में विद्यमान है यह नहीं बोलना चाहिए किसी में सत्व गुण ज्यादा है तो किसी में रजोगुण ज्यादा है तो किसी में तमोगुण ज्यादा है अभी देखिए मैं है ना एक कहानी बताता हूं तो यह गुण जो है और ज्यादा साफ हो जाएगा एक राजा के दरबार में तीन गुनहगारों को लाया गया तीन लोगों ने तीन अलग-अलग तरह के गुनाह किए थे उसमें से एक रजोगुण था उनमें से एक तमोगुण था और एक सत्व गुणी था तीनों का गुना अलग था एक बंदे ने बहुत छोटा सा कोई तो मिस्टेक किया था और एक बंदे ने थोड़ा सा बड़ा गुनाह किया था और तीसरे ने इतनी बड़ा गुनाह किया था कि जिसकी कोई माफी नहीं हो सकती है ऐसे तीन गुनहगारों को एक राजा की सभा में लाया गया एक बंदा जो एकदम छोटा सा मामूली सा कोई मिस्टेक हुआ था और उसको लाया गया राजा के सामने खड़ा किया राजा ने सिर्फ एक ही बात कहा हे बंदे मुझे तो से यह उम्मीद नहीं थी कि तुम ऐसा कर सकते हो सिर्फ इतना बात बोला डाटा नहीं प्रेम से क्या कहा कि हे बंदे तुम एक गलती कर सकते हो सच में मैं मैं उम्मीद नहीं कर सकता ऐसा मैं कल्पना ही नहीं कर सकता ऐसा प्लीज दोबारा मत करना इतनी सी बात सुना वोह बंदा जिससे वो छोटी सी मिस्टेक हुई थी और और उसको इतना बुरा लगा वह बात का कि वह गांव छोड़कर चला गया गांव ही छोड़ दिया और दूसरा बंदा जिसका गुनाह इससे बहुत ज्यादा था राजा ने शासन दिया कि इसको हंटर से 100 हंटर मारा जाए इसको और फिर उसको छोड़ा जाए 100 हंटर मारा जाता है वह दूसरे भक्त को वो दूसरे गुना ार को 100 हंटर खाने के बाद वह घर जाते हैं और घर बंद करके तीन महीने तक घर से बाहर नहीं निकलते हैं लोगों को फेस नहीं कर पाते हैं और एक तीसरा होता है जिसका गुनाह जिसका अपराध इतना बड़ा है अक्षम्य अपराध है उसने बहुत बड़ी गलती की है तो राजा शासन देता है कि इसका आधा सर मुंडवा देना मुंह को काला करना गधे पर उल्टा बिटा करके गांव में इसका जुलूस निकालना सबके सामने तो बिठाया जाता है उसको उल्टा और गांव में सब लोग देख रहे हैं हर आदमी अपना अपना दरवाजा खोल के व बंदे को देख रहा है कि गांव में चौराहे से मतलब जब जाता है गधे पर बिठा कर के उसका जुलूस निकालता है तो जुलूस निकालते समय वह घुमा घुमा के घुमा घुमा के पूरा गाव पर घुमाते हैं उसको जैसे व अपने घर के सामने आता है उसका घर भी पड़ता है बीच में गांव में तो बीवी से कहता है कि अरे बस अब थोड़ा ही देर बाकी है य जुलूस खत्म हो जाएगा मैं घर पर आता हूं पानी गर्म करके रखना स्नान कर लेता हूं यह है तमोगुण व्यक्ति इसको तमोगुण कहते हैं और जो सबसे पहला व्यक्ति था जिसको यह बोला गया कि मुझे तुमसे यह उम्मीद नहीं थी प्लीज यह दोबारा मत करना इतना बोलने की देरी थी वह भी हृदय को ऐसा लग गया कि गांव छोड़ के चला गया और दूसरे बंदे को हंटर पड़ती है 100 कोड़े गिरते हैं और वह तीन महीनों तक घर से बाहर नहीं निकलता है और यह बंदे को आधा सर मुंडवा के मुंह काला करके गधे पर उल्टा बिठा के जुलूस निकाला जा रहा है और अपना घर जब पड़ता है तो बीवी से कहता है कि बस थोड़ा ही बचा है उतना करके मैं वापस आता हूं पानी गर्म करके रखना मुझे स्नान करना है तो यह है तीन गुण कि अगर यह जीवन है अगर तमोगुण ही अगर जीवन हमारे जीवन में अगर प्रधान है इसीलिए आहार आहार में भी सबसे ज्यादा तमोगुण आहार को नॉनवेज को बोला है मांसाहार को बोला है मांसाहार के प्रति अगर किसी का रुझान हद से ज्यादा है तो वह लाख साधनाएं कर ले मन में निश्चल नहीं आएगी ठहराव नहीं आएगा शांति नहीं मिलेगी और जीवन का जो उस से ऊपर का डायमेंशन है वह कभी नहीं खुलेगा कभी नहीं खुलेगा आप लाख कोशिश कर लो और दूसरी बात जो लोग हद से ज्यादा मांसाहार करते हैं मच्छी खाते हैं अब देखिए मांसाहार खाने के बाद तमोगुण बढ़ता है इस पर तो कोई डाउट ही नहीं है कभी भी देखना जो लोग हस से ज्यादा गाली गलोज करते हैं जो लोग हाता पाई तक जाते हैं समझो ऐसे 50 लोगों को आप खड़ा कीजिए इनमें य गुण है कि यह लोग गाली देते हैं बहुत जल्दी गुस्सा करते हैं और बहुत जल्दी इनका हाथ चलता है ऐसे 50 लोगों को खड़ा कीजिए और आप 50 लोगों को से यह पूछिए कि आप आहार में ज्यादा क्या पसंद करते हैं सबका आंसर होगा नॉनवेज सबका आंसर होगा नॉनवेज मतलब नॉनवेज कॉमन होगा उनमें तो नॉनवेज में यह चीज है और मैं यह बात गोवा में कह रहा हूं यह मैं अच्छी तरह से जानता हूं जो आप सबके लिए बहुत मुश्किल है लेकिन अगर बाबा से सच्ची मोहब्बत करते हो ना तो यह त्यागने की ताकत रखोगे और अगर जीवन में सुकून चाहते हो शांति चाहते हो और यह भोग विलासिता से ऊपर उठना चाहते हो जीवन का हायर डायमेंशन तक पहुंचना चाहते हो तो फिर य निचली चीजों को गिराना पड़ेगा तमोगुण से रजोगुण रजोगुण से सगुण तक की यात्रा है लेकिन सत्व गुण का भी अहंकार खतरनाक होता है ऐसा शास्त्र कहता है कि मैं सत्व गुणी मैं बहुत नर इंसान हूं मैं बाकी लोगों से बहुत ज्यादा साफ सुथरा इंसान हूं तो यह भी बड़ा घातक है एक सत्व गुणी व्यक्ति की विचारधारा कितनी शुद्ध होती है मैंने रतन टाटा जी का एग्जांपल देकर के वह बात बताया लेकिन है ना सत्व गुण में भी नहीं फसना है निर्गुण में प्रवेश करना है क्योंकि कई बार ऐसा होता है कि अगर निर्गुण में आपको जगह ना मिली निर्गुण तक अगर आप यात्रा ना कर सके तो वह सत्व गुण से कभी कभार यह माया इतनी खतरनाक है कि कभी-कभी वापस नीचे की तरफ ले आती है अगर गलत संगत मिल गया सत्व गुण का अहंकार आ गया कि मैं इतना अच्छा व्यक्ति हूं वह अहंकार भी कभी-कभी इंसान को गिरा देता है इसीलिए अहंकार का जहां नामो निशान मिट जाता है जहां तीनों गुणों का नामों निशान मिट जाता है उस परम अवस्था का नाम है निर्गुण निर्गुण निराकार वहां पहुंचने के बाद आदमी नीचे आने की संभावना नहीं रहती है इसीलिए कहते हैं कि सत्व गुण से भी ऊपर निर्गुण है तो जब निर्गुण तक पहुंच जाते हो तो नीचे आने की संभावना नहीं है लेकिन अगर रजोगुण से ऊपर उठे हो सत्व गुण तक भी गए हो तो भी वहां से नीचे गिरने की संभावना बहुत ज्यादा है मैंने कल या परसों शायद किसी के सामने ये एग्जांपल रखा था मैं अपनी जीवन की बात बताता हूं बचपन से ही आध्यात्मिक माहौल रहा तो बहुत छोटी उम्र से अध्यात्म के प्रति रुझान था लेकिन कोई भी सवाल कोई पूछता था तो आंसर ऐसे ही निकल जाता था तो डेफिनेटली पिछले जन्म में कमाया हुआ ज्ञान होगा ये ऐसा अदर वाइज पॉसिबल नहीं है या फिर कोई कुछ पढ़ रहा हूं तो ऐसा लगता था कि मैं पहले से जानता हूं तो मेरी उम्र की एक 21 22 साल या 23 साल के दरमियान मतलब जब ऐसा लगा कि मैं हर चीज जानता हूं हर चीज जानता हूं कोई किताब पढ़ रहा हूं तो ऐसा लग रहा है कि मैं जानता हूं किसी से कोई बात कर रहा हूं कुछ अच्छी बातें मैं सुन रहा हूं तो मेरा हृदय कहता है कि मैं जानता हूं मैं जानता हूं मैं जानता हूं यह मुझे ऐसा लगा कि यह कहीं मुझे सात्विक अहंकार की तरफ तो नहीं ले जाएगा यह क्योंकि मैं जानता हूं यह बहुत गंदी चीज है यह भी सात्विक अहंकार है इससे भी परे जाना है तो हर बार यह चीज सताती थी तो बाबा से जुड़ने के बाद ऐसा लगा कि इसको गिराने का एक ही तरीका है कि जो बंदा दिख रहा है वह बाबा का विराट रूप है बाबा के सामने झुकना बहुत आसान है लेकिन बाबा के विराट के सामने अगर झुक जाऊं हर व्यक्ति के आगे अगर जुक जाऊ हर प्राणी के आगे अगर जुक जाऊं हर प्राणी में अगर बाबा को देख सकूं तो वह है सच्ची भक्ति वहां पर अहंकार के लिए जगह नहीं बचेगी देखिए मैं 5 हज करोड़ कोरोना में लोगों की सेवा के लिए दे दी अगर भावना यह होगा कि मैंने 5 हज करोड़ आज लोगों को दिया है आज इतने लोग मेरे यह मेडिकल असिस्टेंसिया बाद अगर आख से बाबा के सामने आंसू निकल रहे हैं कि मालिक तेरी यह करुणा है कि तूने मुझे वैसी बुद्धि दी कि मैं लोगों को मदद कर सकूं तो आज यह जो कार्य मेरे हाथों हुआ है इसका पूरा श्रेय मैं आपको देता हूं अगर आपकी करुणा ना होती तो मैं यह कार्य कर ही ना पाता तो वह है सत्व गुण से यह व्यक्ति आज नहीं तो कल बाहर निकलेगा यह निर्गुण के जाएगा नहीं तो अगर वह अहंकार है सत्व गुण तो किया सत्कर्म तो किया लेकिन अहंकार रखा तो वहां से नीचे उतरने का पूरी संभावना है इसीलिए ही सत्व गुण को भी उनको अर्पण करना है कि तेरे करुणा से हुआ मैं एक बात बताता हूं कोई भी सत्कर्म जो होता है अपने से कौन करता है वो हम लोगों को लगता है कि मैंने किया नहीं हम कर ही नहीं सकते हैं माया का प्रभाव इतना खतरनाक है ना कि एक सत्कर्म हमसे नहीं हो सकता यह कड़वी सच्चाई है प्लीज इस बात को स्वीकार एगा एक भी सत्कर्म हम अपने आप से नहीं कर सकते हैं दुष्कर्म हम अपने आप से कर सकते हैं क्योंकि इंसान की ढ हमेशा दुष्कर्म की तरफ है सत्कर्म की तरफ नहीं है तो अगर एक सत्कर्म होता है एक एग्जांपल देता हूं मैं रास्ते से जा रहा हूं एक एक्सीडेंट देखा मैंने तो मेरा दिल में सबसे पहले वह व्यक्ति को देखने के बाद करुणा जगना चाहिए कि बाप रे यह खून से लथपथ पड़ा है यहां पे अगर इसको समय पर मेडिकल असिस्टेंट मिल जाएगा तो शायद यह बच जाएगा तो मैं चार लोगों को या दो लोगों को इस्तेमाल में ले आऊं उनका सपोर्ट लू और उसको गाड़ी में बिठा करके हॉस्पिटल ले जाऊं और उसका इलाज हो और वहां पर मैंने 5 हज 6 हजार 7 हजार रप जो मेरे पास था मैंने गल पे कर दिया वह बंदा तीन दिन के बाद ठीक हो गया अभी देखिए यह एक नेक काम हो गया मुझसे या आपसे आप ही थे समझो उस जगह पर आपने यह नेक काम को अंजाम दिया लेकिन वह नेक काम को अंजाम देने में भगवान के कितना बड़ा आथ है मैं आपको बताता हूं सबसे पहला आप घर से जब बाहर निकले वह इंसिडेंट होने से पहले वह एक्सीडेंट होने से पहले आपका घर का माहौल बहुत अच्छा होना चाहिए आप बीवी से झगड़ा करके बाहर निकले हुए नहीं होनी चाहिए अच्छे से समझना आप अपने घर में बीवी से झगड़ा करके बहुत ही एक विचित्र मानसिक दशा में हाइपर टेंशन में अगर आप बाहर निकले हैं तो वह एक्सीडेंट देख कर के भी आप नहीं देखेंगे क्यों क्योंकि आप खुद स्थिर नहीं हो तो घर में ऐसा कोई गंदा माहौल नहीं रखा मालिक ने उस समय में यह उनका पहला करुणा अच्छा ठीक है अब एक्सीडेंट देखा उस समय में मन में जो करुणा जागे कि नहीं इसे बचाना चाहिए यह मालिक ने आपके हृदय में भरा यह उनकी दूसरी करुणा और तीसरा आपके हाथ शरीर में इतनी ताकत है कि आप उसको उठा सको आप गाड़ी में डाल सको यह जो शरीर में ताकत दिया मालिक ने यह उनकी तीसरी करुणा और जो हॉस्पिटल ले गए और 70000 का बिल पे करना पड़ा उस समय आपके बैंक अकाउंट में 70 मौजूद थे यह चौथी करुणा मतलब इतने सारे फेसेस से गुजरने के बाद आप वह काम को अंजाम दे पाए और किसी में भी आपका हाथ नहीं है अगर समझो घर में आप झगड़ा करके निकलते बीवी से तो आप यह सेवा कर पाते आपके जेब में अगर पैसा ना होता तो आप य सेवा कर पाते अगर मालिक ने वह करुणा आपके हृदय में ना भरा होता व क्षण में तो आप यह सेवा कर पाते मतलब एक सत्कर्म के पीछे कितने फैक्टर्स मौजूद रहते हैं तब जाकर के आपके हाथों एक सत्कर्म होता है तो उसका श्रेय कभी भी अपने आप मत लेना उसका श्रेय जाता है बाबा को उनके करुणा के बगैर आप एक सत्कर्म नहीं कर सकते संसार में एक सत्कर्म बाहर वालों के लिए तो छोड़ो आप अपने गरवा के लिए कर सकते हैं तो एक सत्कर्म के लिए इतनी चीजें जब सपोर्टिव रही तब जाकर के एक सत्कर्म आपसे हुआ तो फिर यह कहना कि यह सत्कर्म मैंने किया इससे बड़ा अज्ञान क्या हो सकता है कितने आसानी से मतलब आदमी अहंकार में आ जाता है कि यह मैंने किया मतलब अगर वह माल की करुणा ना हो तो आप संसार में एक भी छोटा काम आप अपने आप से नहीं कर सकते हैं यह बात को इसलिए ना जब भी कोई अगर एक सत्कर्म हाथ से हो जा तो आंखों में आंसू रहना चाहिए बाबा को थैंक्स बोलने के लिए कि मालिक यह तेरी करुणा थी जो मेरे हाथों यह सत्कर्म हुआ वरना मेरे जैसा कमीना यह सत्कर्म कभी नहीं कर सकता तो जितनी बारीकी से जीवन को देखोगे उतनी बारीकियां खुलेगी मनो हारिणी शाप ताप निवारनी अज्ञान नाशिनी मोक्ष दयनी परम कल्याण काणी सत चित आनंद प्रदायिनी अनंत कोटि साईं नाथों की जननी साक्षात साईं स्वरूपिणी ग्रंथ राज श्री साईं स चरित दिव्य ग्रंथ की जय",
    "Description": "…",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "3,295 views",
    "Likes": "232"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Sai's hidden precious treasure",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Xapmr_jwr4",
    "Transcript": "Every song written by Pandit K. Razdan and sung by Manhar Udhas about 10 to 12 cassettes in total. Each song is like a pearl, a diamond These songs must be listened to with deep attention and understanding. How many of you here have all 12 cassettes of Manhar Udhas? Please raise your hands Oh dear… Such a city so close to Delhi, and yet no one has the original treasures in hand. This is the greatest tragedy of Baba that the original Baba never came before the world. Nor was He brought forth. The cassettes I’m referring to - those were released in 1984. The very first one came out that year written by Pandit K. Razdan, sung by Manhar Udhas. It was titled- Sai Arpan and it was a big success. After that, every 6 to 9 months, a new cassette would release. I used to stay in Shirdi for months during those days. I would wait for these new cassettes in that combination. I would repeatedly go to the shopkeepers and ask “Has a new cassette of theirs come out?” There are 12 such cassettes. 12 titles in total. And if you don’t have these songs, I can say this with certainty: Whatever Sai Sandhyas you may have done, perhaps you may have just danced to the music but you could not weep with your heart. But the songs I’m speaking of - if they touch your heart they will purify every corner of your being. These are those kinds of songs. One of those songs was just played for you: “Tune Sai Dwaar Pe Jeetne Deep Jalaye” Our misfortune is that the true and beautiful things of Baba are not in our hands. I always say - if there is anything that truly defines Baba in His original essence It is, first, these 12 cassettes written by Pandit K. Razdan. Each song is priceless And second, the Sai Satcharitra. Even if you’re unable to read Sai Satcharitra daily, I would say - Keep playing these songs regularly at home. Let every word echo in your ears They are equal to the Sai Satcharitra in depth They are incredibly profound As Hindi is your native language, you must know that the original Sai Satcharitra is in Marathi. Its full translation into Hindi is still incomplete. It may take some more time. Until then, these 12 CDs., stored in a pen-drive or however you prefer, keep these songs playing in your homes. There are 11 to 12 titles: Sai Arpan, Sai Rishta, Sai Sagar, Sai Savera, Sai Ujala, Sai Bharosa, Sai Manzil, Sai Sansar, Sai Darbar so many such titles. Every single song is a gem in itself. So my humble request to all of you Make these songs a part of your lives. This is the original essence of Baba. And it really painful - that being in the North, so close to Delhi, even then, you are unaware of these cassettes. This is very painful. So I request you Let these cassettes echo in your homes all the time. Just play them once, and you’ll understand why I am saying all this. Every single song is like a Sai Satcharitra The lyrics are written that way The compositions are divine These songs are like nectar—each one. So please, make these songs a part of your daily life. O Mind-Enchanting One, Remover of Curses and Suffering, Destroyer of Ignorance, Bestower of Liberation, The Supreme Giver of Auspiciousness, Embodiment of Truth, Consciousness, and Bliss, the Sacred Mother of countless embodiments of Sai. the True Form of Sai Himself Victory to the Divine Scripture: Shri Sai Satcharita.",
    "Description": "Om Sai Ram🙏🏻\nKrishnaji takes us back to a treasure trove of devotion—the 12 original audio cassettes penned by Pandit K. Razdan and soulfully sung by Manhar Udhas. Released between 1984 and the early 90s, these songs are not just melodies—they are moving mantras, poetic revelations, and living extensions of the Sai Satcharitra itself.\nKrishnaji passionately explains how each song is a gem, a drop of nectar capable of purifying the heart and transforming the soul. With titles like Sai Arpan, Sai Rishta, Sai Savera, Sai Ujala, Sai Darbaar, and more, these compositions encapsulate the essence of surrender, faith, and divine love.\nHe urges every true devotee of Sai Baba to rediscover these forgotten jewels and make them a part of daily spiritual practice. These aren’t just bhajans—they are experiences. They are living scriptures set to music. \n✨Let these songs fill your home—and your heart—with the living presence of Sai.✨\n\nॐ साई राम🙏🏻\nकृष्णाजी हमें भक्ति की उस अनमोल धरोहर की ओर ले चलते हैं—पंडित के. राजदान द्वारा रचित और मनहर उदास की भावपूर्ण आवाज़ में गाए गए 12 मूल ऑडियो कैसेट्स की ओर। सन् 1984 से 90 के दशक के आरंभ तक रिलीज़ हुए ये गीत केवल धुन नहीं हैं—ये चलायमान मंत्र हैं, काव्यात्मक उद्घाटन हैं, और स्वयं श्री साईं सच्चरित्र का संगीतमय विस्तार हैं।\nकृष्णाजी पूरे भाव से बताते हैं कि हर एक गीत एक रत्न है, अमृत की एक बूँद है, जो हृदय को शुद्ध कर आत्मा को रूपांतरित करने की शक्ति रखती है। साईं अर्पण, साईं रिश्ता, साईं सवेरा, साईं उजाला, साईं दरबार जैसे शीर्षकों के साथ, ये रचनाएँ पूर्ण समर्पण, श्रद्धा और दिव्य प्रेम का सार समेटे हुए हैं।\nवे हर सच्चे साईं भक्त से निवेदन करते हैं कि इन भूली-बिसरी मूल रचनाओं को अपने दैनिक आध्यात्मिक जीवन का हिस्सा बनाएं। ये केवल भजन नहीं हैं—ये अनुभव हैं। ये संगीत में संचित जीवंत शास्त्र हैं।\n✨इन गीतों को अपने घर में, और अपने हृदय में गूंजने दीजिए—और अनुभव कीजिए साईं की जीवंत उपस्थिति को।✨\n\n\n🔴 Tune Sai Dwar pe (Spiritual Meaning)\n   • तुने साई द्वार पे जितने दीप जलाये  | Tune ...  \n\n🔴 Google Drive Link to download songs  \n\nhttps://drive.google.com/drive/folder... …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "3,094 views",
    "Likes": "261"
  },
  {
    "Title": "बाबा हंडी बनाते समय चुले की अग्नी कम-ज्यादा क्यों करते थें ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5yDAhc7nQMs",
    "Transcript": "Music In even smallest of leelas ,Baba has hidden very deep meaning Baba ,In 38th adhaya when he used to make food for people with their own hands in handi(pot) He would serve vegetarians veg food and for those who ate non veg food like muslims or some of our own people who are accustomed to eating non-vegetarian, Babab would serve them according to their needs At beginning, Baba would descend to their level and feed them according to their desires The idea was that \"If I will take care of their desires willingly, then for sure one day they will also take care of my wishes and desires too\" So why shouldn't I consider their wishes first This was Baba's greatness But, if we accept their greatness and don't reciprocate it, then their could not be any great dishonesty than this When Baba would bring all the ingredients to cook food in a large pot(handi) then there's a specific ovi in chapter 38, Ovi 37 \"To make the fire in the fireplace burn slow or bright, he himself moved the faggots up and down repeatedly' Now consider that if the food is raw ,uncooked the housewife's would know this better,who cook regular food I have even heard that men in goa also cook and especially non-veg, even if the lady in the house cooks non-veg or not but the men indeed know how to cook that's how deep their love is for non-veg I don't know how much my words would have hurt ,Sorry Let's consider non-veg, because we ourself's are non-veg if you have kept meat to cook in a vessel on gas or chulla as it used to be chullas in those days so it has been written as \"Chullivari\" here Now, if the meat is raw and water is been poured to cook it then you will increase the flame right even if you have added potato or pulses you will keep the flame high so that it cooks nicely that's why it is said as \"Chulli majal vaishvanar\" meaning the fire in the stove \"Indaney he swaye khalvar\" meaning baba would himself control the intensity of the flame \"Karit varchevar Baba\" meaning moving the faggots up and down Now this is a simple leela When at the start we add pulses or raw meat, we add the wood fuel to increase the flame so that it cooks properly But as soon as it is cooked we remove the wood so that the intensity of the flame decreases Similarly this human body also becomes handi(clay pot), after it is undertaken by Baba and this need to be cooked when the Tamas increases more the tamogun(tamas), more the intensity of the flame So Baba gives more taap(pain), with increase in flame intensity so this tamogun gets removed as soon as possible and as soon as the tamogun is cooked and it leaves the body and satvagun enters, the flame intensity is decreased just like we decrease the flame at the end time of cooking Baba also used to decrease the flame as soon as the rajvagun, tamogun leaves hence no need to cook on high intensity anymore So automatically the wood fuel used to be decreased Even if the leela is talking about handi(clay pot), but way more deeper mystry is hidden in it It is telling us our state, that Baba cooks us, just llike he cooks the handi(clay pot) The intensity of the flame is based on the level of tamogun in you, More tamogun, more pain of the flame and as soon as I think tamogun has left and you have entered rajogun then the flame intensity is decreased further and if rajogun is also finished then again the flame intensity is decreased Then the nectar of dhyan, dharana, and samadhi is obtained even such a small thing as handi is filled with immense depth To clear this further I'll take the story of laxmibai shinde, Adhyaya 42 Few days are only left for Baba to take samadhi, and one day he asks laxmibai shinde to bring him a piece of bread and some dry condiment so she thinks Baba is hungry therefore she hurrily goes back home and brings what she is asked to and give's it to Baba But Baba picks up the bread as it is and feed's the dog nearby. Laxmibai stood stunned there and she asks Baba, I ran with such eagerness to get you bread because you were hungry. You didn't even put a single bite in your mouth, and you fed it to the dog. At that time, Baba says, \"Oh Lakshmi if I am hungry, I can speak with my tongue. But these creatures (animals) don't have a tongue, so who will understand their hunger? This one was hungry, so I fed it in my name. So Baba is saying, \"You fed me your whole life, Lakshmi.\" Baba would not touch anyone else's food until Lakshmi's bread arrives , it is written. And what is the reason for that? How sincerely must she have fed him? Baba would never have seen what she fed him in his life. Remember this He saw how sincerely she fed him. That's why even if delicious food with five courses was brought, Baba would not touch it until Lakshmi's food came. He would wait, he would wait for hours even though five-course meals were brought, he could be fed in a golden plate But Baba would still wait. Do you know why? Just imagine how much goodwill Lakshmi must have had to feed Baba food throughout her life. And through this leela, Baba wanted to tell Lakshmi, \"Oh Lakshmi, you have fed me till today, there is no doubt in your faith towards me. But in just a few days, I am going to bid farewell to this world. I am going to leave this body. So I deliberately fed this bread to the dog today, because after I leave, will you stop this service? No, now that service should increase on a larger scale. Until today, you have served this manifest form of mine. From today onwards,you have to serve this whole universe, my cosmic form. That's why I made you accustomed to it beforehand, by feeding it to the dog This is one depth of this leela. And then after a few days, Baba says, \"My teeth are not strong enough now. So, crumble the chapati into warm milk, break it into small pieces and put it in. And then soak it and bring that milk-mixed bread to feed me.\" And it is said that Baba kept eating that for a few days. Then after some more time, Baba says, Lakshmi, now even that cannot be eaten. So, bring kheer (rice pudding).\" Kheer doesn't even need to be chewed; you can swallow it as soon as you put it in your mouth. So, understand this sequence well first dry bread, then bread soaked in milk, and then finally kheer. And the first dry bread was fed to an animal When we have animal-like Tamogun within us, at that time Baba gives us dry bread to eat, meaning the penance is equally rigorous. How many such leelas can I tell you? First, he makes us eat dry bread so that the Tamogun within us is destroyed. As soon as Tamogun is destroyed, Baba says, \"Now that much dry bread is not needed. Now it has come to Rajogun. Now, to destroy its Rajogun, bread soaked in milk can be chewed easily But when Rajogun is also destroyed, and only Satvagun remains, Baba says, \"Now give kheer to this person.\" Kheer doesn't even need to be chewed; you can swallow it as soon as you put it in your mouth. And here, kheer means initially, in penance, selfless service, all kinds of physical labor, everything came. But as soon as Tamogun and Rajogun are gone, and Satvagun is also gone then kheer is attained. Kheer means a person becomes engrossed in meditation, contemplation, and samadhi. They attain meditation, contemplation, samadhi. That is kheer. So these leelas are so deep. So we have to reach from dry bread to kheer. Every human being's journey will start with dry bread. That's why the first few years are very tough. I am saying this from experience. So be prepared for that. But only those who eat that dry bread will later attain the nectar of kheer. So these are very small leelas. Does anyone have any doubt about this? Please Annaji, you initially explained the importance of the three Gunas. Rajogun, Tamogun, and Satvagun. You also gave an example of Ratan Tata. Right! And you said that whatever money we earn, if we invest it in service, there is nothing wrong with it And finally, you said that whatever you do, in the next birth, there will be no deficiency in your sadhana at Sai Baba's feet. Absolutely. My question is, I have read in Sai Satcharitra that when you do this, you attain salvation while living in the world. So how will a second birth be received? Because there is more Satvagun in it, right? Why should we understand that a second birth is needed to attain salvation? If a person whose Satvagun is at such a level, okay, then salvation should be attained, right? It should be done, okay, okay. Why a second birth? Because after passing through 8.4 million species, we get human birth. It is written in Chapter 8 that we attain salvation in this very birth. So what about the second birth? On this, a little... Okay, okay, understood. It's a journey from Tamogun to Rajogun, and from Rajogun to Satvagun. But even the ego of Satvagun is dangerous, so the scriptures say. That \"I am Satvaguni. I am a very noble person. I am much cleaner than others.\" So this is also very fatal. How pure is the ideology of a Satvaguni person? I explained that by giving the example of Ratan Tata. But one should not get stuck even in Satvagun. One must enter Nirgun (beyond attributes). Because many times it happens that if you don't find a place in Nirgun, if you cannot travel to Nirgun, then sometimes this Maya (illusion) is so dangerous that it sometimes brings you back down. If you get bad company, if the ego of Satvagun comes, that \"I am such a good person,\" that ego also sometimes brings a person down. That's why where the ego's trace is completely erased, where the trace of all three Gunas is erased, that supreme state is called Nirgun (attributeless), Nirgun nirakar After reaching Nirgun Nirakar (formless), there is no possibility of coming down. That's why it is said that above Satvagun is Nirgun So when you reach Nirgun, there is no possibility of coming down. But if you have risen above Rajogun and even gone to Satvagun, there is still a very high possibility of falling down from there. I think I gave this example to someone yesterday or the day before. I will tell you about my own life. From childhood, there was a spiritual environment. So, from a very young age, there was an inclination towards spirituality But if anyone asked any question, the answer would just come out So, it must definitely be knowledge earned in a past life, otherwise it's not possible. Or if someone is reading something, it feelt like I already knew it. So, around 21, 22, or 23 years old, I felt like I knew everything, If I was reading a book it felt like I knew it. If I was talking to someone, if I was hearing good things, my heart would say, \"I know, I know, I know.\" This made me feel like, \"Is this not leading me towards sattvic ego?\" Because \"I know\" is a very bad thing. This is also sattvic ego. One has to go beyond this too So, after connecting with Baba, I felt that the only way to bring this down is that the person who is visible is Baba's cosmic form. It's very easy to bow down to Baba, but if I bow down before Baba's cosmic form if I bow down before every person, if I bow down before every creature, if I can see Baba in every creature, that is true devotion. There will be no room for ego there. See, Ratan Tata spent thousands of crores of rupees during Corona for medical assistance. If Ratan Tata's feeling was that, \"I have given 500 crores to people today. Today, so many people are alive because of my medical assistance.\" If this is the feeling, then it is the ego of Satvagun. That is dangerous. But if after that same 5000 crores, tears are rolling down his eyes in front of Baba, saying, \"Lord, this is your compassion that you gave me such wisdom that I could help people.\" \"So, today, for this work that has happened through my hands, I give all the credit to you. If your compassion had not been there I would not have been able to do this work.\" So, that person will come out of Satvagun today or tomorrow. This will go towards Nirgun. Otherwise, if there is ego, even if good deeds are done, but ego is kept, hen there is a full possibility of falling down from there. That's why even Satvagun should be offered to Him, that \"it happened because of your compassion.\" I'll tell you one thing. Any good deed that happens, who does it on their own? We think that \"I did it.\" No, we cannot do it. The effect of Maya is so dangerous that we cannot do a single good deed ourselves. This is a bitter truth, please accept this. We cannot do a single good deed on our own. We can do bad deeds on our own. Because a human being's inclination is always towards bad deeds, not towards good deeds. I'll give you an example. I'm walking on the road, I saw an accident. So, my heart should first feel compassion after seeing that person, \"Oh my God, he is covered in blood here. If he gets medical assistance on time,he might survive.\" So, I involve four people or two people, take their support, put him in a car and take him to the hospital, and he should get the treatment there. And there, I paid 50,000 or 70,000 rupees, or whatever I had, through Google Pay. That person recovered after three days Now look, this is a good deed accomplished by me or let's say from you. You only accomplished the good deed But how big a hand God has in accomplishing that good deed, I will tell you. First, when you left your house, before that incident, your home environment should be very good, you should not have left after fighting with your wife. Understand this well. If you have left your house after fighting with your wife, in a very strange mental state, in hypertension, then even after seeing that accident, you won't see it. Why? Because you yourself are not stable. So, the Lord did not keep any bad environment in the house at that time. This is his first compassion. Okay, now you saw the accident. At that moment, the compassion that arises in your mind, that \"no, he should be saved,\" the Lord filled this in your heart. This is his second compassion And third, you have enough strength in your body to lift him, to put him in the car The strength given by the Lord to your body, this is his third compassion And when you took him to the hospital and had to pay a bill of 70,000 at that time, 70,000 was available in your bank account. This is the fourth compassion. Meaning, after going through so many phases, you were able to accomplish that work, and you had no hand in any of it. If, suppose, you had left after fighting with your wife, would you have been able to do this service? If you didn't have money in your pocket, would you have been able to do this service? If the Lord had not filled that compassion in your heart at that moment, would you have been able to do this service? Meaning, how many factors are present behind a good deed, only then does a good deed happen through your hands. So, never take the credit for it yourself. The credit goes to Baba. Without his compassion, you cannot do a single good deed in the world. Leaving aside doing a good deed for outsiders, can you do it for your own family? So, for one good deed, so many things were supportive, only then did a good deed happen through you. So then, to say that \"I did this good deed,\" what could be greater ignorance than that? How easily a person falls into ego, thinking, \"I did this.\" Meaning, if the Lord's compassion is not there, you cannot do a single small thing on your own in this world. This is why, whenever a good deed happens through you, there should be tears in your eyes to thank Baba, saying, \"Lord, it was your compassion that this good deed happened through my hands, otherwise a wretch like me could never do this good deed.\" So, the more minutely you observe life, the more intricacies will open up So, this was about reducing and increasing the fire in the stove, increasing or decreasing the degree of penance. Baba knows best what is more in whom, how much to give to whom, how much to reduce the troubles. That's why, even if there are more troubles, one should assume that there is more Tamogun within me, that's why Baba is giving me more trouble. In that phase, avoiding more sins, enduring that phase somehow while continuously remembering Baba. After that, there are only good days. So, this was about reducing and increasing the fire in the stove. It was a very small leela, but its depth has no limit. Shri Sai Satcharitra Grantharaj Jaykara Manohari, Shaptapa Nivarini, Agnan Nashini, Mokshadaaini, Param Kalyan Karini Sat Chit Anand Pradayini, Anant Koti Sai Natho Ki Janani, Sakshat Sai Swarupini Granth Raj Shri Sai Satcharitra Divya Granth Ki Jai.",
    "Description": "📖 श्री साईं सच्चरित्र | लक्ष्मीबाई शिंदे की कथा\n\nयह सिर्फ रोटी की कथा नहीं — यह उस निष्काम प्रेम और समर्पण की यात्रा है जो आत्मा को उसके सत्य स्वरूप तक पहुँचा देती है।\nक्या बाबा उस रोटी को स्वीकारते थे, या उस रोटी में छुपी भक्ति, त्याग और भावना को?\nक्या लक्ष्मीबाई की सेवा बाबा को उस सूक्ष्म स्थान तक छूती थी जहाँ भक्ति मोक्ष का मार्ग बन जाती है?\n\nइस अध्याय में — सूखी रोटी से खीर तक, और अंततः अग्नि तक — हर प्रतीक एक गहरा आध्यात्मिक संकेत है।\nबाबा केवल अर्पित वस्तु नहीं, उसमें छिपे भाव, गुण और उद्देश्य को स्वीकार करते हैं।\n\nयह वीडियो दिखाता है कि कैसे बाबा की दृष्टि में साधारण घटनाएँ भी आत्मा के तम से सत्त्व की ओर उन्नति का माध्यम बन जाती हैं।\n\n🌼 लक्ष्मीबाई को दिया गया विशेष स्नेह एक संकेत है — कि जब समर्पण पूर्ण हो, तो साईं स्वयं भक्त की भक्ति बन जाते हैं।\n\n🙏 यह वीडियो उन साधकों के लिए है जो साईं की लीलाओं को केवल कथा नहीं, बल्कि आत्मिक संवाद मानते हैं।\n\nदेखिए, अनुभव कीजिए — और संभव है आपकी आत्मा भी इस कथा में स्वयं को पहचान ले।\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiSatcharitra #LakshmibaiShinde #Bhakti #SpiritualWisdom #SaiLeela #Sadguru #DivineGrace\n\n📖 Shri Sai Satcharitra | The Story of Lakshmibai Shinde\n\nThis is not merely a story about bread — it is a sacred journey of selfless devotion, where a simple offering leads the soul toward its highest truth.\nDid Baba accept just the roti, or the love, surrender, and sacrifice hidden within it?\nDid Lakshmibai’s pure service touch Baba at a divine level, where devotion becomes the very path to liberation?\n\nIn this chapter, every simple symbol — dry bread, bread soaked in milk, sugar, kheer, and finally, fire — carries a profound spiritual message.\nBaba never received just physical offerings — He accepted the qualities, intentions, and emotions that resided within them.\n\nThis video reveals how Baba, through an ordinary act, illuminates the soul’s subtle journey from tamas (inertia) to sattva (purity).\nIs this just a story about food? Or a deeper divine play where the soul is refined through love and surrender — seen only through Sai's divine gaze?\n\nLakshmibai receiving Baba’s special grace is perhaps a sign that when surrender is total, Sai Himself becomes the fruit of devotion.\n\n🌼 This video is for those seekers who see Baba’s leelas not as mere events, but as deep spiritual signals.\n\n🙏 Watch, reflect, and feel the divinity in Lakshmibai’s pure devotion — perhaps your soul may recognize itself somewhere in this story.\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiSatcharitra #LakshmibaiShinde #Devotion #SpiritualWisdom #SaiLeela #Sadguru #DivineGrace …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "2,583 views",
    "Likes": "207"
  },
  {
    "Title": "क्या एक साधारण इन्सान किसी मुर्ती में प्राणों की प्रतिष्ठा कर सकता है ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6kbeZSRUPQw",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "Enjoy the videos and music you love, upload original content, and share it all with friends, family, and the world on YouTube.",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "शिर्डी के साई मंदिर में नंदी क्यों रखा है?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UoZHvmif3tg",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "🔱Why does Nandi stand guard at Sai Baba’s Samadhi Mandir?🔱In this captivating discourse, Krishna Ji unveils how Nandi’s presence proclaims Baba as the very...",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Essence of two verses written in Shirdi Sai Temple",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-rmmtOf3jMA",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "Enjoy the videos and music you love, upload original content, and share it all with friends, family, and the world on YouTube.",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "अनंत कोटी ब्रह्मांडनायक... ( इस जयकारे का महत्व)",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TAwQaDNiYmk",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "Enjoy the videos and music you love, upload original content, and share it all with friends, family, and the world on YouTube.",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "श्री साई सच्चरित का हृदय अध्याय 11 (सभी लिलाओं का रहस्य)",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oeDtOJNXhhc",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "Enjoy the videos and music you love, upload original content, and share it all with friends, family, and the world on YouTube.",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "भक्ती जितनी बड़ती है उतनी ही मन की गंदगी भी बड़ती है ऐसा क्यों ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d56d5xBKqi0",
    "Transcript": "Om Sai Ram Countless salutations at the feet of all Sai devotees. Today’s topic has emerged from many sources - Satsangs, Zoom sessions, written messages, and regular comments from devotees. One question which is frequently asked, and I thought, let’s address that question today. Many devotees say: “The more we engage in devotion, the more we practice spiritual discipline and worship, the more impure thoughts arise in our minds. Why is it so? This is a very common question. Those who are sincerely devoted to Baba - or any deity, who are immersed in worship and devotion, inevitably go through this phase. As their devotion deepens, the more negative, impure thoughts seem to arise, with greater force. This is not mere imagination. Every devotee walking this path expresses this experience. Before I share my thoughts, let’s first see what Baba says about this. in Sai Satcharitra The answer is given by Baba Himself, Chapter 13, verses 23 to 30 In just seven verses, He offers profound insight. I will take each verse one by one. First, I’ll read it in Marathi, and then I’ll translate it into Hindi. I’m reading in Marathi because that’s how the text is structured, and since Baba Himself authored this scripture, Baba’s words are in Marathi and might be a bit difficult for some to understand, but when I translate it into Hindi afterward, everything will become clear. Since this is written by Baba, we’ll take it as it is. Even though I am a South Indian, my heartfelt intention is to present Baba’s words in Marathi as they were written. Verse 23, Chapter 13: 'Jeev mhanti sattādhīsh, karīl je je yeil ichchhesh' 'aise jayache vāṭe mānas, kathānakas ya parisave' The soul (jiva) says to itself, “I am powerful, I can do whatever I wish.” Those who believe, “I am independent, I am powerful, I can do whatever I want,” should listen carefully to Baba’s words that follow. Further Baba says in, verse 24 'Jeev jarī kharā swatantra, sukhā lāgī kashtatā ahorātra,' 'padarī padate mātra duhkha, he to charitra satteche' Baba says, if the soul is truly independent and can do whatever it desires, If there were even a speck of truth in this. then it would engage into actions only for happiness, 24 hours a day. Yet, despite this, a chain of sorrows follows it. Why is this so? Because, if it were truly independent, it would be tirelessly engaged in actions for happiness, yet sorrow relentlessly pursues it, tracking it down as if seeking its address. Baba says, “This is your so-called power, this is your so-called independence.” 'Dukhe taalavaya laagi, asta savdhaan jaago jaagi,' 'ti tya dhundit laagvegi, tyachich maagi ghetat' And to avoid sorrows, a person remains ever-cautious, every moment, he stays alert, ensuring no sorrow touches him, no calamity befalls him. Yet, despite this, sorrow finds him, seeks him out, and inevitably befalls him. And further says, 'Varu jaata gala padati, jhaaduni takita adhik lipadati.' 'vaugi jivachi dhadpad ti, ahoraati to sheen' Baba says, if you try to push sorrows away, they cling to you. If you try to shrug them off, they cling even more tightly. This is the soul’s futile effort and struggle. In this endeavor to escape sorrow, day and night, it remains engrossed, yet sorrow never leaves its side. Baba further says, 'Jeev jari khara swavash, tari to asta purna sukhvash,' 'dukhacha ek lavalesh, resbharhi natalta.' If the soul were truly powerful, truly independent in its actions, if it had such power, it would always remain in a state of happiness, You would be immersed solely in joy, and not even a speck of sorrow would enter your life. And then Baba goes on to say, 'Paapa na aacharita kadhi, punyachich karita samruddhi,' 'sukhachich sampaditi vruddhi, swatantra buddhi mhanoni.' You would never engage in sinful actions. You would cultivate only virtuous deeds, accumulating merit in your life, and thus, experience only happiness. Since you are independent, So, first of all to experience happiness, you would not commit any sinful actions, You would bring only virtuous deeds into your life, And thus, in life, experience nothing but joy alone. But Baba further says, 'Pari jeev nahi swatantra, paathi laagle karmatantra,' 'tayacha khelachi vichitra, haati kalsutra karmaache.' But Baba says, “O soul, you are not independent. You are not powerful.” 'Pari jeev nahi swatantra, paathi laagle karmatantra,' Which means, the deep-rooted impressions from many lifetimes follows you. The tendencies from countless births trail you. Their shadow looms over your existence. You remain entangled in the habits of many lifetimes. As the saying goes, “Old habits die hard.” So, the tendencies, habits, and impressions from past lives force you to commit sinful actions. Knowingly or unknowingly, sinful deeds are committed through you. Baba clearly states this. 'Pari jeev nahi swatantra, paathi laagle karmatantra,' In this way, the desires, impressions, sinful actions and bad habits from many lifetimes are following you and hover over you like a shadow. You are caught in their grip. Even if you wish, you cannot perform those virtuous deeds, because the web of karmas from past lives trail you. 'tayacha khelachi vichitra, haati kalsutra karmaache.' And remember, this thread of karma is strange and mysterious, pulling you toward sinful actions even against your will. And compels you to perform those wrong deeds. This is Karma Tantra (Karmic Law) It is no simple matter Next comes a very important verse, Baba says, 'Punyakade laksh jaay, paapakade odhiti paay,' 'Satkarmacha shodhita thaay, kukarma ka aatude.' All the wisdom you have attained in life, all the discrimination with which you have enriched your intellect, has instilled in you the realization that one must abstain from unrighteous deeds, and pursue only virtuous actions. This intellect perpetually inclines toward meritorious deeds, seeking to amass only virtue, yearning to embody noble actions in your life. 'Punyakade laksh jaay' Meaning, your aim is directed toward righteousness. 'Paapakade odhiti paay,' Yet, your steps, against your will, are drawn towards sin. Your vision is fixed on righteousness, but your feet tread the path of transgression. This inner conflict, this struggle, is an inevitable part of every soul’s journey. For the desires and impressions from countless lifetimes compel you, even unwillingly. Just as a moth is irresistibly drawn to a flame and perishes in its radiance, so too is a person helplessly driven to commit wrong deeds. Baba clearly explains this: 'Punyakade laksh jaay'- Though your aim is to pursue virtuous actions, 'Paapakade odhiti paay,'- your steps veer toward sin. 'Satkarmacha shodhita thaay, kukarma ka aatude.' Despite your resolve to seek righteousness, why do these sinful acts occur? Baba has elucidated this clearly. That is why, the more we engage in worship, the more we immerse ourselves in devotion, the more we dedicate ourselves to spiritual practice, our mind, against our wishes, prompts us to commit unrighteous acts. This is because we carry an immense burden, a legacy of impressions, desires, and harmful habits from past lives. These sinful acts accumulate over time, forming an enormous heap of tendencies, a crushing weight under which we are entirely subdued. Despite our reluctance, wrong deeds manifest through us. This is precisely why, the more we engage in spiritual practice, the more impure thoughts arise in our minds, and at times, sinful actions occur as well. Baba Himself declares that this path is arduous, far from ease. Back then, Perhaps today’s generation is unfamiliar with this, but those who have listened to songs from the 1970s may recall a famous film song that says: 'Shama kahe parwane se pare chala ja' 'Shama kahe parwane se pare chala ja, Meri tarah jal jayega yahan nahi aa' 'Wo nahi sunta usko jal jana hota hai' This is a very famous song, If you have heard it, the lyrics carry a deeper meaning. The flame warns the moth, “Go far away,\" 'Shama kahe parwane se pare chala ja' Which means, go far away. 'Meri tarah jal jayega yahan nahi aa' \"lest you burn as I do. You see how I am consumed - do not come here,\" Yet the moth does not heed the warning: it is destined to burn. Similarly, despite our reluctance, a person is compelled to commit unrighteous acts, driven to actions that lead to their own destruction. So, Baba has explained this with utmost clarity. But, why does this happen? This is one of the reasons, and the other is, Sometimes, Baba Himself places the burden of such actions on certain devotees, But for those of a lower spiritual level, it is their Karma Tantra (Karmic Law), because of which these sinful deeds take place through them. However, when it comes to a truly virtuous devotee, one who is pure and sattvic but perhaps tinged with subtle ego of righteousness. Baba sometimes introduces such trials into their life as a test. Let us examine Chapter 33, verse 132. Here, Baba speaks of such a virtuous devotee - pure, sattvic, and exemplary. At times, Baba orchestrates such divine play in their life. But why? He clarifies this as well. 'Ekda jo preme dekhila, tayacha aajanm ankit jhala,' 'Kelval ananya premacha bhukela, tayachya haakela o deyi.' If such a virtuous devotee, with complete body, mind, and wealth, casts even a single glance of love towards Baba, Baba becomes eternally bound to them - marked for all lifetimes. Baba surrenders to such a devotee. 'Kelval ananya premacha bhukela, tayachya haakela o deyi.' Baba longs only for such unalloyed devotion, and when such a devotee calls out, Baba responds with affirmation. 'Nalage tayasi sthal va kaal, ubha nirantar sarvakaal,' 'kaisi kothun dabeel kal, karani akal tayachi.' Very important verse, Baba says: 'Nalage tayasi sthal va kaal' There are no boundaries of place or time. Baba can manifest His divine play as per His will. 'ubha nirantar sarvakaal' He stands ever-present, every moment, before us. 'kaisi kothun dabeel kal, karani akal tayachi.' When and how He turns the key, when and how He stirs upheaval in their life - only Baba knows. His actions are unfathomable, beyond comprehension. In the next verse, Verse 134, Baba says: 'Aisi kahi kareel rachana, manat yetil kutark nana,' 'to to drishti thevita charana, dhyan dharana vadhel.' Baba clarifies it in this verse, that, 'Aisi kahi kareel rachana' Baba Himself creates such circumstances in the devotee’s life, stirring up a tumult of impure thoughts, a deluge of wrong inclinations in their mind. First of all, why does He do this? And that too in virtuous devotee's Life? The answer lies in the next line of the verse: 'to to drishti thevita charana, dhyan dharana vadhel.' When a virtuous devotee is overwhelmed by such trials, for him, this is the greatest affliction - not the sorrows of life, but the arising of a single impure thought. He cannot bear it. Baba deliberately plants these wrong thoughts in his mind, and the sole purpose is to elevate his devotion from a lower level to the highest pinnacle. Because, the more Baba sows such impure thoughts, the more the devotee pleads before Him, chanting of His name intensifies, his devotion deepens. In truth, this is what Baba seeks from such a devotee, profound spiritual practice, deep worship. Thus, Baba intentionally plants the seed of an impure thought in his mind. 'to to drishti thevita charana' As and as he surrenders before Baba, his devotion intensifies. In this way, the devotee’s focus and contemplation intensify. Consider this: the 'Sai Satcharitra' is a divine scripture. I say this time and again, please do not compare it with any other text. The answers found here are unparalleled; no other scripture of Sai, in the world can offer such insights. It is impossible. Please do not waste your life collecting dry, barren knowledge. Our time is limited, and in that precious time, embrace the 'Sai Satcharitra', authored by Baba Himself. People have made a marketplace of information - please, do not fall into their trap. Such answers, such mysteries, are found only in the 'Sai Satcharitra'. Baba has poured His heart into it, laid bare His very soul in this scripture. So, instead of wasting time on other texts, even if you don’t understand the 'Sai Satcharitra' at first, read it repeatedly. One day, the entire 'Sai Satcharitra' will descend into your being, and you will become Sai Baba Himself. I go so far as to say this. So, Baba plants an impure thought in the mind of a virtuous devotee to deepen his devotion, to intensify his focus and contemplation. And one day, true samadhi (spiritual absorption) will dawn in his life. Baba further says: 'Aise jhaliya ekagra man, ghadel atyanta Sai chintan.' Even if driven by fear of his mind’s impurities, the devotee strives to expel this filth. Through this effort, his devotion and contemplation grows, his mind becomes focused, and through this, an unceasing devotion of Sai arises. 'Hech ha Sai ghei karavun, karyahi nirvighna paar pade.' This is what Baba makes happen, And this is how Baba transforms a virtuous devotee into an unalloyed devotee, In this way, Baba ensures that His work is accomplished. What is Baba’s work? To transform a virtuous devotee into an unalloyed devotee, to establish them in the non-dual principle (Advaita), that “I and Thou are not separate; we are one.” Baba says, “I accomplish this work with ease.” But this applies to a virtuous devotee. If a devotee is not virtuous, if they are steeped in worldly desires and impurities, they are already immersed in that filth. Why would Baba plant impure thoughts in such a person? So, this must be clear, Baba handles a virtuous devotee in this way, elevating their devotion to celestial heights. his devotion was grounded, yet Baba elevated it to the skies. This is a profound mystery. Baba further says: 'Vyavahar na lage sodavayas, sutel aapo aap havyaas,' 'aisa ha mana lagata abhyas, karyahi aprayas ghadel.' There is no need to abandon worldly duties, family, or society. 'sutel aapo aap havyaas,' As your contemplation and focus deepen, attachment to the body, family, and world automatically begins to wane. 'aisa ha mana lagata abhyas, karyahi aprayas ghadel.' By engaging the mind in the practice of contemplation, Baba says, the devotee’s liberation is assured, and His work of transforming an ordinary devotee into Sai Himself is fulfilled. So, Baba has answered this clearly: The more we engage in spiritual practice, worship, and deep devotion, the more impure thoughts afflict us. When such thoughts assail a virtuous devotee, their worship intensifies. In truth, even if they stand in the midst of a marketplace, at that time an impure thought arises in their mind, they connect with Baba in that very moment. They need not go to a temple for that, in that instant, a temple arises where they stand. Tears stream from their eyes, and they enter a state of prayer, pleading, “Lord, grant me release from these thoughts.” This is how a true devotee reacts in such situations, Baba has conveyed it through these verses. Now, on this very topic, I shall unfold yet another depth before you. There is a Leela of Lord Krishna - Gopika Vastraharan (disrobing). We all know this story, and much nonsense is often spoken about Lord Krishna in context to this Leela. Because its depth is not understood. This Leela aligns closely with our topic, So, I thought to include it here. When the 'gopis' go to bathe at the riverbank, Lord Krishna steals their clothes and sits on a tree. As the 'gopis' realize their clothes are missing, they know with certainty that this is Krishna’s doing, no one else’s. So, they call out to Krishna. From among the branches and leaves of the tree, Krishna reveals one of His divine feet, showing them, “Today, I have stripped you bare.” This “stripping bare” does not refer to the physical body, If an impure thought is planted in the mind, if wrong inclinations are sown, and if we are made to perform an act we shouldn’t, in that moment, a person surrenders to God in a way they may never have before. In truth, “stripping bare” is in this way, God plants an impure thought in our mind first, and elevates that thought to such a peak that it leads us to commit a wrong act. And when that wrong act occurs, the devotee who stands before God, pleading, is truly pleading. In that state, they are passing through a realization: “Lord, protect my honor. Let the mistake I’ve made never be revealed before anyone. I fall at Your feet.” They plead in countless ways, and in that moment, Lord Krishna extends His divine foot, showing the 'gopis', \"Now you are finally been brought down a peg, This is what I wanted - for your surrender to become so complete. That is why I stripped you bare.\" In reality, from my perspective, this is truly known as \"stripping bare\". Let me add one thing: Lord Krishna did this only with the 'Gopis'. The 'gopis' devotion was of such a high order. Similarly, in the life of a true devotee, if God causes them to mistakenly commit a wrong act, their devotion becomes even deeper, more unwavering. Their surrender becomes complete. Their prostrating gains true authenticity. There is a world of difference between how he once prostrated himself and how he prostrates himself now. Just as Lord Krishna performed the Leela of stealing the 'gopis’ clothes, Similarly, in the life of a true devotee, Baba causes a wrong act to occur, “stealing their clothes” in this way. And honestly, even if someone’s physical clothes were taken, it wouldn’t be as significant. But when a true devotee is compelled to commit a mistake, this “stealing of clothes” is something only that devotee can truly describe. Because this Leela of 'Disrobing the Gopis', is connected to the question that always arises in people’s minds: “Why, as my devotion deepens, do these impure thoughts arise?” This is the entire mystery. Another leela comes to mind. Gondavalekar Maharaj, a great contemporary saint of Baba from Satara, Maharashtra, His samadhi is located in Gondawale. One of His devotee visits Him and stands before Him with folded hands, pleading, “Maharaj, you told me to chant the name of 'Rama' constantly, and I do so 24 hours a day. But, so many impure thoughts have begun to plague my mind. When I didn’t chant His name, these thoughts didn’t arise. But the more I chant, the more these impure thoughts torment me. Why is this, Maharaj?” He is crying and pleading before Maharaj. Gondavalekar Maharaj says, “Consider this: There is a burrow where six or seven venomous snakes reside. At night, they come out, hunt frogs, small insects, or creatures, consume their prey, and return to rest comfortably in the burrow. Now, suppose a saint discovers that venomous snakes live there and pours boiling acid into the burrow. As soon as the acid touches the snakes, they hiss and slither out. Will they stay in the burrow? No, they’ll all rush out. Similarly, when the acid of God’s name enters the cave of your heart, all the desires and impurities within you, those venomous snakes - come hissing out. But remember, they are coming out from within you, not entering from outside. In this way, the name of God purifies you from within.” There are many reasons why it happens so. Today’s talk was for those who are truly walking this path, who are facing this struggle. I offer countless salutations at their feet, because if they are going through this path today, I can imagine how beautiful their future will be. So, I offer countless salutations at their feet. Kabir Ji says on this matter: 'Durjan ki karuna buri, Bhalo Sai ko traas,' 'Suraj jab garmi kare, Tab barsan ki aas.' If Sai, our Sadguru, tests us in this way, if He burns us like the sun does, remember that this heat lifts the salty water of the ocean, turns it into clouds, and transforms it into sweet water, compelling it to rain down. So, if a devotee is going through such trials today, their future will be filled with joy, purity, and an ocean of bliss. This is equally true. I hope today’s topic touches your heart. And the question that arises in many minds: “Why is this happening?” has many reasons, as explained. According to Baba, in Chapters 13 and 33, and the depth of 'Disrobing the Gopikas' leela, which I’ve shared with you, there are many reasons why this happens. But whatever Baba does is for our good, for our welfare, for our progress, and to lead us to the ultimate goal. Jai Sai Ram O Mind-Enchanting One, Remover of Curses and Suffering, Destroyer of Ignorance, Bestower of Liberation, The Supreme Giver of Auspiciousness, Embodiment of Truth, Consciousness, and Bliss, the Sacred Mother of countless embodiments of Sai. the True Form of Sai Himself Victory to the Divine Scripture: Shri Sai Satcharita.",
    "Description": "✨“Why Bhakti Awakens the Mind's Darkness”✨\n🍁Why does the mind become more restless as bhakti deepens?\n🍁Why do impure thoughts rise just when we begin sincere sadhana?\nIn this eye-opening talk, Krishnaji reveals Baba’s own answer from the Sai Satcharitra - a truth every devotee must hear.\nIs this darkness… or the beginning of inner cleansing?\nFind out why the path of devotion gets harder before it liberates you.\n🙏🏻Om Sai Ram🙏🏻\n\n---------------------\n0:00 Introduction\n1:40 Baba’s insight: Karmatantra\n11:36 Past lives shape present sins\n12:57 Purpose of sin in the life of a Sadbhakt\n21:48 How a Sadbhakt faces impure thoughts\n22:28 Gopika vastraharan: Explained\n26:13 Gondavlekar Maharaj’s wisdom through a story\n28:48 Kabirji’s Doha\n29:28 Final Reflections\n-----------------------\n\n✨\"भक्ति मन के अंधकार को क्यों जगाती है?\"✨\n🍁जैसे-जैसे भक्ति बढ़ती है, मन और बेचैन क्यों होने लगता है?\n🍁सच्ची साधना शुरू करते ही अशुद्ध विचार क्यों उभरने लगते हैं?\nइस गहराई भरे प्रवचन में कृष्णाजी बताते हैं - बाबा ने साईं सच्चरित्र में खुद इसका जवाब दिया है।\nहर भक्त को यह सुनना ज़रूरी है।\nक्या यह अंधकार है… या भीतर के शुद्धिकरण की शुरुआत?\nजानिए क्यों भक्ति का मार्ग पहले कठिन होता है - और फिर वही मुक्ति का द्वार बनता है।\n🙏🏻ॐ साईं राम🙏🏻\n\nReferences:\n✨जीव म्हणती सत्ताधीश । करील जें जें येईल इच्छेस । ऐसें जयाचे वाटे मनास । कथानकास या परिसावें ॥२३॥ जीव जरी खरा स्वतंत्र । सुखालागीं कष्टतां अहोरात्र । पदरीं पडतें दु:ख मात्र । हें तों चरित्र सत्तेचें ॥२४॥ दु:खें टाळावयालागीं । असतां सावधान जागोजागीं । तीं त्या धुंडीत लागवेगीं । त्याचीच मागी घेतात ॥२५॥ वारूं जातां गळां पडतीं । झाडूनि टाकितां अधिक लिपडतीं । वाउगी जीवाची धडपड ती । अहोराती तो शीण ॥२६॥ जीव जरी खरा स्ववश । तरी तो असता पूर्ण सुखवश । दु:खाचा एक लवलेश । रेसभरही नातळता ॥२७॥ पापा न आचरितां कधीं । पुण्याचीच करितां समृद्धि । सुखाचीच संपादितां वृद्धि । स्वतंत्र बुद्धि म्हणवोनि ॥२८॥ परी जीव नाहीं स्वतंत्र । पाठीं लागलें कर्मतंत्र । तयाचा खेळचि विचित्र । हातीं कळसूत्र कर्माचें ॥२९॥ पुण्याकडे लक्ष जाय । पापाकडे ओढिती पाय । सत्कर्माचा शोधितां ठाय । कुकर्मीं काय आतुडे ॥३०॥ Adhyay 13, Shri Sai Satcharitra\n\n✨एकदां जो प्रेमें देखिला । तयाचा आजन्म अंकित झाला । केवळ अनन्य प्रेमाचा भुकेला । तयाच्या हांकेला ओ देई ॥१३२॥ नलगे तयासी स्थळ वा काळ । उभा निरंतर सर्व काळ । कैसी कोठून दाबील कळ । करणी अकळ तयाची ॥१३३॥ ऐसी कांहीं करील रचना । मनांत येतील कुतर्क नाना । तों तों दृष्टी ठेवितां चरणां । ध्यानधारणा वाढेल ॥१३४॥ ऐसें झालिया एकाग्र मन । घडेल अत्यंत साईचिंतन । हेंच हा साई घेई करवून । कार्यही निर्विघ्न पार पडे ॥१३५॥ व्यवहार नलगे सोडावयास । सुटेल आपोआप हव्यास । ऐसा हा मना लावितां अभ्यास । कार्यही अप्रयास घडेल ॥१३६॥ Adhyay 33, Shri Sai Satcharitra\n\n✨दुर्जन की करुणा बुरी, भलो साई को त्रास ।\nसूरज जब गरमी करै, तब बरसन की आस ॥- Kabirji …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "13,869 views",
    "Likes": "660"
  },
  {
    "Title": "तन को श्रृगांर मन को दुत्कार",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YJ7wk1fBN2U",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "🌸 आत्म-जागृति का अमृतमय सत्संग: \"तन का श्रृंगार और मन की उपेक्षा\" 🌸इस गहन, हृदयस्पर्शी सत्संग में हम एक बहुत ही मौलिक और गूढ़ प्रश्न के उत्तर की खोज करते ह...",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "क्या है गणराज के विसर्जन का राज",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jKhJZ3lMBww",
    "Transcript": "Countless salutations with reverence at the feet of all Sai devotees, And heartfelt greetings to all of you on the occasion of Ganesh Utsav. Ganesh Utsav Ganesh Chaturthi I wish to speak a few words on this subject today, That is why this shoot is taking place. We call Lord Ganesh the bestower of intellect. We consider Ganeshji to be the master of the wisdom within us. And because of this, Ganeshji holds a very deep place in our lives. In Ganesh Utsav, three core processes stand out before us. The first is the invocation of Ganesh. With so much of celebration and enthusiasm we welcome Ganeshji, Bringing Him into our homes, into our hearts that is the first step: the invocation, the arrival of Ganeshji. The second is the worship of Ganeshji. Some people keep Ganeshji at home for one and a half days, then immerse Him. Some keep Him for 5 days, some for 7, and some for 11. Throughout that time, they keep the sacred lamp burning continuously - an uninterrupted flame before the deity. They perform aarti morning and evening, Offer food items as bhog, And with great sincerity, they perform His worship. Finally, based on one’s feeling - whether after 1.5, 5, or 11 days Ganeshji is taken for immersion in water (Visarjan). Now the question is - what are these processes? The arrival of Ganeshji, His worship, His immersion these aren’t mere rituals. There is a profound principle behind them. The invocation of Ganeshji means, The arrival of true intellect in our lives. The arrival of 'Sadbuddhi'. Not just intellect - I will say, the arrival of sadbuddhi - righteous wisdom. If our intellect lacks discrimination, dispassion, Lacks the illumination of holy scriptures, Lacks the company of saints and the presence of satsang, That intellect is a perverse intellect. If we fill our intellect with discrimination: What is right, what is wrong, What is honesty, what is dishonesty, What is dharma, what is adharma, What is righteous conduct, what is unrighteousness So, this whole process to fill the intellect with such discrimination is the true arrival of Ganeshji, the real invocation. That from today onwards, we will live our lives guided by inner light. Or else, even if this life slips from our hands, it won’t matter If our longing for dispassion grows this intensely, And if our intellect becomes filled with such clarity, Then know this: Ganeshji has entered our heart, our intellect. That is His true arrival. That is His true invocation. If we fill our intellect with radiant wisdom, With dispassion, With the study of scriptures, With the principles of dharma, ethics, devotion, and patience, Then know for sure - Ganeshji has arrived. His invocation is complete. Now, the second process To physically bring Ganeshji, worship Him outwardly, offer our vows and prayers, and then take Him for immersion, That alone cannot be called true Ganesh Puja. That alone does not complete Ganesh Utsav. There is a deeper meaning. So the first process is: Ganeshji’s invocation, which means the arrival of vivek (discrimination) in our intellect. the arrival of dispassion in our intellect, the arrival of devotion toward saints and holy men, in our intellect. The ability to recognize and follow their guidance - that is true invocation of Ganeshji. To know His will is to invoke Him. This is the original invocation. This outer idol worship should lead us to this inner transformation. Otherwise, if we remain confined to idol worship alone, We cannot reap its full benefit our bhakti will remain incomplete. This doesn’t mean I’m saying - don’t bring Ganeshji home, don’t worship Him. No, I’m not saying that. But how is our devotion? Normally, it is śakam bhakti - desire-driven. Because Ganeshji is known to fulfill wishes and vows, Every household brings Him during Ganesh Utsav. It's not bad, nor wrong. But it’s incomplete. That’s what I wish to say. So, the first process is done, 'What is the invocation of Ganeshji?' Now, what is Ganeshji’s Pujan? The same intellect where we’ve welcomed discrimination, Where we’ve studied sacred texts, Where we’ve listened to the words of the Sadguru, Where we’ve come to understand His will And now align our lives according to that will - That is true worship. Whatever we have heard, Whatever we have studied from scriptures, Whatever we’ve absorbed from saints If we can mould our mind, senses, and body accordingly, If we can live in alignment with that wisdom Then that is real Ganesh Puja. So, this is the second process. First, fill the intellect with wisdom - that is Ganeshji's invocation. Then, to put that enlightened intellect into practice - that is Ganesh Puja. This is the original worship. If you are following this inner process of invocation and worship, Then honestly, even if you’ve never brought Ganeshji home, Even if you’ve never performed the outer rituals, but Ganeshji resides in your heart every moment. In the physical process, you have to immerse the idol, but here, Lord Ganesh ,whom you have invoked in your heart never leaves. His worship continues ceaselessly within. That is the real Ganesh Puja. The more you fill your intellect with light/ wisdom, knowing His wisdom, command, and will, if you align your life accordingly. and change yourself according to it. Even if it means going against your own desires, if you can uphold the Sadguru’s will, the scriptures’ truth, Even by subduing your mind- Then living moment by moment in that spirit. Is the real Ganesh Puja. And finally, Ganeshji's immersion Now many people ask: We invite Ganeshji with such devotion, We worship Him with so much love for 5, 7, 11, or some people for 1.5 days, Then why do we go and immerse Him in water? That is because: The intellect you have filled with discrimination, Through which you have performed noble actions, And shaped your life by His will, and walked your life according to His will, Unknowingly, A sāttvic ego begins to form. And in reality, the final immersion, is letting go of that sāttvic ego So, at the end we immerse Ganeshji in the water. The sattvic ego which gets built within us, after doing good deeds, We have to immerse that sattvic ego. So we may become egoless. And until we become egoless, The Nirākār Parmātmā - the formless God - will not be attained. That is why the sattvic ego is to be immersed at the end. That is real immersion (Visarjan). But if you haven’t done any noble actions, Then how will sāttvic ego even arise? What will you immerse? So first: Filling the intellect with discrimination is the arrival of Ganeshji. Then, practical implementation of that intellect filled with discrimination, and living accordingly, is Ganeshji's worship And finally, Because of living such a life, due to the noble actions, subtle ego gets formed, knowningly or unknowingly. And immersion of this subtle ego is the true Ganesh Visarjan. Until this depth enters our lives, Even if we bring Ganeshji year after year for hundreds of births, install his idol, worship Him, and immerse Him It will hold no real meaning. Until this depth enters our lives. And until that depth is experienced, Know that the real Ganesh Utsav has not yet begun in your life. This may sound harsh, But it is the bitter truth. Many times I’ve been invited to people’s homes for Ganesh Chaturthi, They call me with love, and I go. But with a heavy heart, I must say, The aarti that they sing every morning and evening, They don’t even know its true meaning. This is not how Ganesh Puja should be done. Please forgive me if these words hurt, But unless we rise above empty rituals and grasp the depth within, These customs will continue meaninglessly for centuries. But if the clarity you've gained today stays with you, And if you invoke Ganeshji with that clarity Then that is the true Ganesh Utsav in your life. I truly hope that this video that you are watching, on the occasion of Ganesh Utsav, Shakes your heart from within. This is the original Ganesh Utsav. May this Ganesh Utsav take place in your life. And may your life become a festival at every moment. With that prayer, I take leave. Jai Sai Ram O Mind-Enchanting One, Remover of Curses and Suffering, Destroyer of Ignorance, Bestower of Liberation, The Supreme Giver of Auspiciousness, Embodiment of Truth, Consciousness, and Bliss, the Sacred Mother of countless embodiments of Sai. the True Form of Sai Himself Victory to the Divine Scripture: Shri Sai Satcharita.",
    "Description": "💫What Is the Real Ganesh Utsav?💫\nWe welcome Ganeshji with devotion, sing aartis with joy, and immerse His idol with great emotion…\n✨But have we ever asked: What does it truly mean?\n✨What is the real arrival of Ganeshji? What is true worship — and why must He be immersed?\nIn this thought-provoking and deeply spiritual talk, Krishnaji reveals the forgotten essence behind Ganesh Utsav.\n✨Why is Ganeshji called the Lord of intellect? \n✨What is the real Puja? \n✨And why does the ego need to be dissolved — even after devotion?\nThis is not a message of ritual... it is a call to inner transformation.\nIf you’ve ever celebrated Ganesh Chaturthi, you must hear this.\nThe answers may shake you.\nBut they will also awaken you.\nWatch till the end — the true Ganesh Utsav begins from within.\n🙏🏻Om Sai Ram🙏🏻\n\n-----------------------\n0:00 Introduction\n0:50 3 Spiritual Methodologies\n2:33 Significance of Ganesh Aagaman\n4:45 Significance of Ganesh Puja\n8:58 Significance of Ganesh Visarjan\n10:33 Key Takeaways\n------------------------\n\n💫असल गणेश उत्सव क्या है?💫\nहम गणपति बाप्पा का स्वागत करते हैं, भाव से आरती गाते हैं, और विसर्जन के दिन भावुक होकर उन्हें विदा करते हैं…\n✨लेकिन क्या कभी सोचा है — ये सबका असली अर्थ क्या है?\n✨गणेशजी का आना क्या सचमुच बाहर से है? पूजा क्या केवल फूल और आरती तक सीमित है? और उनका विसर्जन… वो क्यों ज़रूरी है?\nइस गहराई भरे और आत्मजागृति जगाने वाले प्रवचन में, कृष्णाजी बताते हैं — गणेश उत्सव की वो सच्चाई जो अक्सर छूट जाती है।\n✨क्यों गणेशजी को बुद्धि का देवता कहा गया?\n✨सच्ची पूजा किसे कहते हैं?\n✨और भक्ति के बाद भी अहंकार का विसर्जन क्यों ज़रूरी होता है?\nयह सिर्फ़ एक परंपरा नहीं — भीतर परिवर्तन का निमंत्रण है।\nअगर आपने कभी गणेश चतुर्थी मनाई है… तो ये बात ज़रूर सुनिए।\nयह उत्तर आपको झकझोर सकते हैं — लेकिन भीतर कुछ जगा भी देंगे।\nआख़िर तक ज़रूर सुनिए — असली गणेश उत्सव वहीं से शुरू होता है।\n🙏🏻ॐ साईं राम🙏🏻 …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "2,556 views",
    "Likes": "213"
  },
  {
    "Title": "सुर्यमार्ग और चंद्रमार्ग",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hyVNnVSGGpc",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "सुर्यमार्ग और चंद्रमार्गhttps://youtu.be/oHbcDaUvs1g?si=XRSr8z3y5QR_SCOX",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Maya Kya hai ? / माया क्या है ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s4k1EBNfxKc",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "Maya Kya hai ? / माया क्या है ?",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "मुक्ती और मोक्ष में क्या अंतर है ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IpyyntSSlGQ",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "Understanding Liberation and Salvation | मोक्ष और मुक्ति का सरल ज्ञान | Sai Satcharitra InsightsIn this enlightening video, we dive deep into spiritual teach...",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "नारायण या नारायणी सेना ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zuCS7YPf7-8",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "नहीं थी वो असली महाभारत जो लड़ी गई थी कुरुक्षेत्र में,सच्ची महाभारत तो चल रही है हर हृदय के क्षेत्र में।त्याग दो मन से कामनाओं की नारायणी सेना,और सौंप दो जीव...",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "शिरडी के साई मंदिर में हर दिन लाखों की भीड़ क्यों उमड़ती है ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tytTQBh4Z3w",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "शिरडी के साई मंदीरमे दर दिन लाखो की भीड़ क्यो उमड़ती है ?यह वीडियो शिरडी साईं बाबा की महिमा, उनकी करुणा और भक्तों पर उनकी अपार कृपा को उजागर करता है। इसमें ब...",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "द्वार द्वार भटकेगा दुःख बढ जायेगा",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k2Uyvk_R0Q8",
    "Transcript": "Wherever Sai has lit the lamps, even in the darkest of nights, light has appeared. Now see, Baba has lit so many lamps, and you are the very light. Until now, we only believed in Baba, and that too by our own choice. We used to believe Baba in our own way. It was our own point of view, our own perspective. But today Baba's grace was bestowed. Baba gave us another pair of glasses, said, you see me from my point of view, you have seen Me from your point of view for so many years, for so many births, come for the first time today, see me from my point of view, and his point of view is this Sai satcharitra, this is his point of view, this is his vision, to see him from his point of view, this is Satsang, we respect Baba a lot like, but do not know him at all, and this is not something exaggerated by ego, this is a bitter truth, we do not know him, Sai satcharitra never opened up to us, so Baba says, see me from my point of view, then one day you will become as great ad Me. If you understand my will amd act accordongly then one day then one day there will be no difference between me and you, we both will become one, like the river merges into the ocean and becomes the ocean. Similarly, this soul when will merge with the Supreme Soul and will be called the Supreme Soul. So, in reality, the day the curiosity to know Baba increases, the day the curiosity to know the depth of Baba increases, then accept that Baba has lit a light in us. Baba has dispelled the darkness of many of our births, means he lit the light of a lamp in the darkness of many births and in reality, all these are those lamps which are sitting here. For the first time, this life has become bright. It is shining. Baba's real form has been revealed by Baba in front of his devotees by lighting that light and unless Baba show itself His supreme form to us, we cannot see it so he has made me a medium, but he himself is revealing his form in front of you through these discourses. There is no superiority of mine in this. he wanted to appear in front of you, so he is appearing. So, Wherever Sai has lit the lamps, even in the darkest of nights, light has appeared. First verse of the song is: Open your eyes a little in the light of knowledge, Keep faith in the protector of the whole world, Sai is your protector, Sai is the truth, Sai wealth is your true earnings. You spent your life worshipping me by your own will, But now, just try to understand my will. Baba is saying: The day you understand my will, that day you will come into the light, and your eyes will be opened. and trust fully in the protector of the world. You have been asking for worldly desires from him until now, and I have fulfilled some of your desires. But now, enough. Now, ask for me from me ask for Sai from Sai. He is the one who has solved everyone's problems So, if you ask for Baba from Baba, then you have entered the light of knowledge. Don't want anything but Baba from Baba What we do is we make Baba a means to fulfill our desires. We go to Baba with a list, trying to fulfill our worldly desires by placing them on Baba's shoulders.\" Baba is not our destination, Baba is a ginie for us, through whom we want to enjoy some petty desires of the world, but Baba is saying that by keeping your feet on the shoulders of worldly desires you should reach me because I am your destination, you will have to do the opposite, what have we done till today, we have used Baba like a ladder by climbing on Baba's shoulders we kept trying to reach some petty desires of the world, we have made Baba a ladder, whereas Baba should become the destination, \"by trampling the desires of the world under your feet, reach me,\" is what Baba is saying, this is light of knowledge. If by trampling the desires of the world under your feet, you reach me, then you are under the light of knowledge Open your eyes a little in the light of knowledge, Keep faith in the protector of the whole world, Sai is your protector, Sai is the truth, Sai wealth is your true earnings. so Sai's wealth is his form - Sat (truth), chit (awareness) and bliss (anand). Truth means that which never fades away,that soul entity Chit means when the knowledge of entier creation enters that truth, then it is called a Chit and the third is Anand. Anand will become my form, so that is the wealth of Sai, to earn that wealth, you should keep trying from today onwards, you have spent your life in struggle having it so this was the first stanza, open your eyes a little in the light of knowledge, have faith in the whole world's protector, Sai, your protector, Sai is the truth, Sai's wealth is your real earning. In the 32nd chapter, Baba says that the treasure of spirituality he possesses is so abundant that you should come with a cart to take it away. Baba is waiting for someone to come and take this treasure away completely. want to be robbed, He's saying,\"I am eager to be robbed and I am sitting with thousands of eyes in search of one person who will come and rob me completely\" but Baba says that no mother's son has been born yet who will rob me completely, I tell everyone to come and take, take away, and everyone comes and says give me, what am I want to give and what are you asking for? I am talking about pouring out the spiritual treasure and you, being engrossed in worldly desires, are saying give it to me, give it to me, what do I want to give, what are you asking for, well, if Baba fulfills any of my desires, assume that I wanted a child and he gave me a child, but after two years the child falls ill, or after 15-20 years turns out to have poor character and is scorned by society, will my child act as per my wish? If he acts then you will get caught in attachment and if he doesn't then you'll get caught in disappointment if he goes according to your wish, then you will be trapped in his attachments, and if he goes against you, then you will be trapped in sadness for him, so in both the cases You are impoverished Such are the relationships and achievements of the world. ask only for what is appropriate or beneficial but But fulfill your duties and maintain good relationships with your family. All these relationships are linked to you because of karmic bonds. Some have come as your mother, some as your father, some as your sister, some as your brother, some as your wife, some as your child. Because of these karmic bonds you are in relation with them. The only way to be free from these bonds is not to expect anything from them, just keep giving, giving, giving. By doing so, you will free yourself from their debts. Give them love, respect, and comfort. If you can give these three things, you will quickly be freed from your karmic debts. Spirituality does not mean that you should leave the world, family and run away, rather while living in the world and among the family, one has to live and die for their happiness by being detached and selfless because one has to get free from their debt, hence hand over the body to the family for their happiness and comfort and engage the mind in Baba, this is the only way to come into His light, running away from the world or family cannot be called Paramartha (the supreme goal), it cannot be said at all, Now, second stanza You'll wander from door to door, and your sorrow will increase. But if you hold onto one door, you'll experience a divine intoxication. This has been explained many times—everything other than Sai leads to difficulties. These are powerful lines. But what does wandering from door to door mean? You'll wander from door to door, and your sorrow will increase. People have list of desires and with that list, people first go to one god. For four months, they praise that god— by offering blades of grass to Ganapati, Bel leaves to Shiva. If you pour milk on the Shiva Lingam, all your desires will be fulfilled. But if after four months of offering milk to Shiva, desires are not fulfilled, you think, \"Nothing has happened, let's try Ganesh Ji since Ganesh Chaturthi is coming.\" Then you worship Ganesh Ji, hoping that things might work out there. If Ganesh Ji doesn't fulfill your wishes, then you think, \"No problem, Navratri is coming. I've heard the Goddess is more powerful, especially during Navratri when she becomes stronger.\" When Ganesh Chaturthi arrives, Ganesh Ji becomes very great. When Shivaratri comes, Shiva becomes very great. People start wandering from deity to deity because of their desires. This is what is meant by wandering from door to door, increasing your sorrow. But if you hold onto one door, You will get intoxicated if you're a devotee of Shiva, remain a steadfast devotee of Shiva. If you worship Ganesh Ji, then become a firm devotee of Ganesh. Don't look left or right after that. Then, don’t turn to Sai Baba with a wavering heart. Have such devotion that whether your desires are fulfilled or not, you will not leave your master's feet. This is called unwavering devotion. When our devotion becomes firm towards one, gradually, slowly, that divine intoxication begins to take hold. But those who are fickle-minded change gods every week. Saint Dnyaneshwar Maharaj called this \"wavered devotion\" (vebichari bhakti). Vebhichari bhakti is like a prostitute's love, where a prostitute changes customers daily to earn money. Similarly, a person changes gods for their desires. So, should we not worship other gods and goddesses? We absolutely should. If we are devotees of Sai Baba, we must worship Ganapati on Ganesh Chaturthi and worship Shiva on Shivaratri. But whenever we worship other gods and goddesses, we should do it with full devotion. We should worship as the rest of the world does, but when asking for something in return, ask for only one thing: \"O Master, O Goddess, O Deity, I bow at your feet. If you are truly pleased with my service, increase my devotion towards my Sadguru infinitely.\" If you make this prayer to that deity or god. They would dance Shivaji will dance in joy, finding that in millions, there's one person who has come before him with such depth He served me with all his heart, just as the whole world does, but when it comes to asking, he asks for devotion to his Guru. This is what is called unwavering devotion. I always say, even if you gain heaven from some other door, some other deity, I don't want to set foot there. And from your door, even if I receive hell, I will not leave your embrace. This is unwavering devotion. If such unwavering devotion arises towards a Sadguru, then you have entered the light. The eternal grace of Baba has showered upon you. How many times has this been explained that everything apart from Sai is alien. If you turn towards any other deity besides Sai, it is all foreign. And remember, one soul, one Supreme Being, has taken on so many forms. What Sai cannot do, no one else can. What Shiva cannot do, no one else can, because one Supreme Being has taken on all these forms. They are not different. Your understanding is not mature enough yet, so Shiva appears different, Rama appears different, Sai Baba appears different, Christ appear different, and Muhammad the Prophet appears different. Because that sharpness hasn't yet come to you. Otherwise, the essence is one; we are calling the one Supreme Being by so many names. Just as you can call a book a scripture, a text, a book, or a volume—no matter how many names you use, the object remains one. Similarly, the Supreme Being is one. We are calling that one Supreme Entity by different names If this clarity comes, then you will realize that what my Baba cannot give, no one else can give. so wandering will stop even if the devotion is desire driven then at least be devoted to one God, keep asking for that, do not change the gods and goddesses, in fact, doing devotion by having desires is wrong, okay, if the desires are not falling, then at least be devoted to one, keep asking for that only, whether you get it or not, but as soon as you start changing the gods and goddesses, you shift to promiscuous devotion You will wander from door to door, and your sorrow will increase. But if you hold onto one door, divine intoxication will take hold. How many times has this been explained that everything apart from Sai is foreign. Apart from Sai, everything else, every deity is secondary. If I find what I'm seeking, let it be at Your door, Baba; otherwise, I don't want it. Because if my desires are fulfilled elsewhere, my faith will be divided, and that's even more dangerous. Do you understand? If I achieve what I desire from another place, whether through the worship of Ganesh or Shiva, my desire may be fulfilled, but my faith will be divided. Baba, don't let my faith waver. Even if I stray to another doorstep, don't let my desires be fulfilled there, Baba, because my faith will be divided. I am a weak person, Baba; don't play such a deceptive game with me. I might weaken, but You must remain strong, Baba. If my desires are to be fulfilled, let them be fulfilled by You, or not at all. If there is such clarity, then you will understand the second verse: 'If you wander from door to door, your sorrow will increase. But if you hold on to one door, you will begin to feel the intoxication of devotion.' Even if obstacles and difficulties keep coming your way, if your faith remains unshaken, eventually, the intoxication of devotion will start to take over. This is the highest form of intoxication in the world, and Baba wants to lead us to that state. But for that, our faith must remain steadfast. This was the second verse. Now, the third: 'Look at Sai and transform your world. How simple and beautiful this love is, give it and make it yours. Whoever has truly looked to Sai with hope, Sai’s grace has fulfilled their hope. Look towards Sai and beautify your world, life. why are you looking toward the world, why are you looking toward desires? The more your desires go unfulfilled, the closer you will become to Baba. And the more your desires are fulfilled, the further you will drift away from Baba. So if Baba is the ultimate destination, then Baba, please don't let any of my desires be fulfilled, but let my devotion to you grow day by day. Automatically, this will curb my tendency to make more desires. But if, by mistake, you fulfill one of my desires, then I will bring a whole list next time. If you fulfill just one desire, I'll come back with ten more. Therefore, on one hand, do not fulfill my desires, and on the other hand, let my devotion to you grow stronger day by day. If you can manage both of these, Baba, then I will never stray. But if my devotion doesn't grows and my desires start being fulfilled, I will easily stray from your path, Baba. This is the heartfelt plea of a true devotee, the prayer from the depths of a devotee's heart. Well, how to get love by giving love. Giving love does not mean that you run to Shirdi once a month and visit the Samadhi Mandir. Giving love doesn't mean one goes and offer shawl or sheet Love doesn't mean to observe Sai satya vrat every full moon day No, This is not said to be love. Giving love means to give devotion and get it back multiple times Now How to give devotion? I'll select some verses that describe how to offer devotion at Baba's feet we feel whatever we are doing is devotion. No, but let's understand devotion from Baba's perspective. If we worship Baba with such devotion then that devotion is returned to us a thousandfold. Which devotion is it? Let's explore it through the Sai Satcharitra. chapter 10 verse 126 let's hear in Baba's words - 'premchi nahi jaya thayi, aisa manav hone chi nahi, konache kahi konache kahi, adistan pahi aan aan' There cannot be a person in this world who does not have love in his heart. But someone's love is somewhere and someone's love is somewhere else. Everyone's place of love is different. But without love, existence of a human being is not possible. further He says - 'konache prem che jaga santati, - some people's love is in their progeny Some people's love is in earning respect and wealth. And some people's love is in earning worldly fame. Some people's love is in their family. And worldly fame means that my name gets fame in this. some people's love is that I should nurture the biggest and most mortal knowledge of this world. I should become a chartered accountant. I should become a big manager. So he is focused in attaining power. Some people's love is divided here. And he further says. He is answering. Here, in so many things, someone is stuck in children. Someone is stuck in wife, some are stuck in family and some are stuck in wealth and fame and some are stuck in acquiring knowledge. Then what's is solution 'prem je vishyi vat te' - wherever you are stuck 'te sarv jai ekvatte' - Wherever you are stuck. First, remove all the love from those places. Because your mind is attached there. Baba is saying that the body was meant to be involved, but you attached your mind, which was a mistake. You were supposed to engage your body in family, in progeny, in all the worldly activities, but you attached your mind instead. Since you made that mistake, now remove your mind from there. Remove it from progeny, from family, from wealth, from respect, from property, and turn it all into a mold. Do you know what a mold is? A liquid is poured into it, and after some time, when you take it out, it takes on a specific shape. That is called a mold. So, gather all that love from wherever it is stuck and pour it into that mold. the mold in the form of the feet of Hari. It means that wherever your love was scattered in the perishable world, gather it and pour it into the mold of the feet of Hari, or into the mold of the feet of the Guru. Only then will the feet manifest as devotion. This is the definition of devotion. What we do beyond this is all peripheral, superficial devotion. If we give love to Baba in this way, then in return, that love or devotion will be returned to us multiplied a thousand times. Do you understand what devotion means? Wherever my mind is entangled, I first withdraw my mind from there, and then I gather it and place it at Baba’s feet. That is devotion. Indirectly, Baba is saying that you want to perform devotion to me, but you do not want to let go of your attachment to the world. That cannot happen. I always say that every devotee goes through three stages. The first stage is when the devotee comes to the court of God or the Guru only for worldly desires. But as their wisdom develops (He) says that no, no, along with the world, God is also needed. But here it is being said that this is not devotion either. The day when all worldly desires fall away and only the desire for devotion remains, that is true devotion, So, if we give such love, such devotion to the Guru, it is returned to us a thousand times over. look at Sai and fix your world, how cheap is this deal, give love and take love.' And if you give such devotion to the Guru by controlling your mind, wherever your mind is stuck, you have to remove it from there. Not just remove it, but wherever your mind is trapped in attachment, you must extract it, gather it, and concentrate it, then place that mind at the feet of the Guru. If you can do this, then that is true devotion. If you cannot do this, then our devotion is divided, it is incomplete devotion, divided love. (You say) 'I want the world, and I want you too, Baba.' Fine, it is better than wanting the world. But as you progress a little further, the world falls away, and only God remains. That is where it reaches, and that is what is called true devotion. If someone has truly set their hope on gaining such devotion in Baba's court, Baba says that one day, through my deeds, that hope will be fulfilled, and they will attain that unparalleled devotion because their tendency is prepared for it. I only observe the growing thirst, and as soon as the thirst increases, I am standing there ready with water. I am eager to quench that thirst, standing on one leg. Just let your tendency be ready, let that thirst for unparalleled devotion arise in you, standing on one leg. Bind the bonds of devotion with a strong thread, storms will blow fiercely on this journey. It's been made clear that this path is not easy. Not trying to scare you, but rather to warn you, to make you aware. Because I will create situations that will shake your faith. I'll create intentionally and i will send big storms on your path of devotion and that too of immense strength to waver your devotion and faith But even if you reach a point where you say, \"I may be destroyed, Baba, but my faith will not be shaken,\" then you will succeed. If you can bring yourself to this state, you will overcome even the greatest challenges. Baba sends these challenges so that you can prepare yourself. When you say, \"I may be destroyed, Baba, but my faith will not be shaken,\" If Baba doesn't send these challenges on our path, how will you experience the sweetness of being 'destroyed'? Without these challenges, there would be no preparation. Just as two swords cannot coexist in one scabbard, similarly, in the court of the Guru, two things cannot coexist: one is the ego, and the other is pure devotion. If you want to keep pure devotion alive, the ego must die When the ego dies, only then can pure devotion survive. When the individual soul is ready to die, it transforms into the Supreme Soul. This is what is meant by the sweetness of being 'destroyed.' Now, you might ask why I keep talking about being 'destroyed'? Because the essence of spirituality is to be 'destroyed,' not to 'become.' I speak plainly. True spirituality means to be 'destroyed,' to experience the sweetness of destruction. Now you may ask, \"What will remain after I am destroyed? If I am destroyed, what will be left?\" The answer is simple: to be 'destroyed' means to 'become.' For instance, consider milk. Can milk turn into curd without losing its original form? Once it becomes curd, means the milk is gone Now, can curd turn into buttermilk without losing its original form? No, it cannot. Can buttermilk turn into butter without being 'destroyed'? And can butter turn into ghee without losing its form? The journey starts from milk and ends with ghee. Similarly, when the individual soul dies, it becomes the Supreme Soul. This is what is called the sweetness of being 'destroyed.' This is the sweetness of being 'destroyed.' And if a small existence surrenders, or dies, in the face of a greater existence, what harm is there? So, when I speak of being 'destroyed,' I mean becoming something greater.",
    "Description": "Om Sai Ram 🙏\nIn this soul-stirring talk, Krishnaji takes us beyond melody—into mantra.\nLine by line, stanza by stanza, He unpacks the inner essence of a powerful devotional song ‘Sai Ne Jaha Jaha Bhi Jyot Jalayi Hai’. What might seem like poetic praise on the surface transforms—under His guidance—into a deep, meditative exploration of bhakti, surrender, and self-realization.\nKrishnaji doesn’t just explain the words—He reveals the living truth hidden within them.\nWhether you’ve sung this bhajan for years or are hearing it for the first time, this satsang will transform it into an experience. It’s not just about understanding the song… it’s about letting it enter your heart, awaken your devotion, and draw you closer to the Divine.\n🙏 Let every verse become a mirror.\nLet every note become a step inward.\nLet every meaning unfold as darshan.\n\nॐ साई राम 🙏\nइस हृदय को झकझोर देने वाले सत्संग में, कृष्णाजी हमें सुरों से, मंत्र की गहराई तक ले जाते हैं।\nपंक्ति दर पंक्ति, चरण दर चरण, वे एक शक्तिशाली भक्तिगीत ‘साईं ने जहाँ-जहाँ भी ज्योत जलाई है’, के आंतरिक सार को खोलते हैं।\nजो केवल एक काव्यात्मक स्तुति जैसा प्रतीत होता है, वह उनके मार्गदर्शन में एक गहन, ध्यानमय यात्रा बन जाता है—भक्ति, समर्पण और आत्मबोध की।\nकृष्णाजी केवल शब्दों का अर्थ नहीं बताते—\nवे उन शब्दों में छिपी जीवंत सत्यता को प्रकट करते हैं।\nचाहे आपने यह भजन वर्षों से गाया हो या पहली बार सुन रहे हों,\nयह सत्संग उस भजन को एक अनुभव में बदल देगा।\nयह केवल समझने का विषय नहीं—\nबल्कि उसे अपने हृदय में बसाने, अपनी भक्ति को जाग्रत करने, और ईश्वर के और निकट आने का निमंत्रण है।\n🙏हर पंक्ति एक दर्पण बन जाए।\nहर सुर एक अंतर्मुखी कदम।\nहर अर्थ एक दर्शन बन कर प्रकट हो।\n\n#sai #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #like #comment #share#explore #fyp #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #values #youtube#zili#shraddha#saburi #newgeneration#peace #saisatcharitra#young #corespirituality #saileelarahasya#viral#krishnaji #saiamrutwani #saiamritvachan #saileelarahasya …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "15,900 views",
    "Likes": "625"
  },
  {
    "Title": "अकर्तापन को कैसे साधे",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tCxMAxsRu9o",
    "Transcript": "last week we tried to understand what is heaven as per Baba's words, what does Sai Satcharitra say about heaven, we did deep contemplation and study on that, today the topic that I have brought in front of you Sai baba's words : How to achieve non-doership Because in spirituality till the doership or the ego of doership does not fall, the sadhana (spiritual practice) is not said to be ripe. till the feeling of I created it, I am doing it, does not fall, spirituality neither bears fruit nor flourishes. So we all know that there should not be doership. Whenever someone praises us, we say that I am not worthy of it, Baba is doing all this. 24 by 7 in our mind and brain, the feeling should remain awakened that I am not the doer, Baba is the doer. But does just saying this, just understanding this mean we have attained non-doership? That's the question. What does Baba say about doership and non-doership? What does the Sai Satcharitra say? Let's see. chapter 19 verse 74 - 'n lage sadhan sampanata, n lage shatshastra chaturyata, ek vishwas asava purta, karta harta guru aisa\" How clearly it is stated that there is no need of any resource or tools, nor six scriptures no need of Vedas, there should only be faith that my Sadguru is the doer and redeemer. I am just giving one example, but there are hundreds of such examples in the Sai Satcharitra where it is mentioned how dangerous doership is and the importance of non-doership. and let us see what Kabir ji has to say on this - 'sain se sab hot hai, bande se kachu nahu rai te parvat kare, parvat rai mahi' everything happens by the grace of Master and nothing by His devotees Until Master shows His compassion and grace, we cannot advance even an inch in our spiritual practice. Nothing happens by individuals He can turn a mustard seed into a mountain, or can turn a mountain into a mustard seed. If He wishes, He can elevate us to the heavens, and if He wishes, He can plummet us from heavens to earth There is no place for ego of doership here because, in reality, we are not the doers. We will understand this in time. and further Kabir Ji says in a couplet - 'jo kuch kiya, so tum kiya, mai kiya kachu nahi, kahu kahi jo mai kiya, tum hi the mujh mahi' Kabir Ji is saying that whatever was done, it was done by you. I did nothing. Even if I claim in ego that I did something, it was you who were working through me. Whether I am aware of this or not, Owing to ignorance, I may not feel that You are present in me and You are operating me. I may not be conscious of this but in reality You are awaken within me 24 by 7 you control my senses, my mind, my intellect, and even my life force. I am alive only because of your grace, and it is through your power that all my actions are carried out. So Kabirji has also clarified that the doer is the Lord; nothing happens through individuals or devotees. There is a beautiful story about non-doership in the Sai Satcharitra. First, I will recount the story, and then we will try to understand it in more depth. In Chapter 51 of the Sai Satcharitra, there is the story of Bhakt Pundalik Rao. This story is well-known among those who read the Sai Satcharitra. Vasudevanand Saraswati, a contemporary of Baba during that time, once visited Rajamundry in Andhra. Pundalik rao, who was a lawyer by profession, was traveling from Manmad to Rajamundry for some reason and takes Darshan of Vasudevanand saraswati During their conversation, when Pundalik rao mentions that he has come from Manmad, Vasudevanand Saraswati feels, as shirdi is very near to Manmad, that you came from my dear friend's place. I am very pleased. so when you will visit Shirdi to take darshan of Sai Baba, offer this coconut at His holy feet That saint in Rajamundry, who is also known as Tembe swami, gave Pundalik rao a coconut with a sacred intention and asked him to take it to his friend in Shirdi. He instructed Pandali Karav to tell Baba that He has sent the coconut for Him Pundalik Rao takes the coconut and comes back to manmad. A while goes by and he heads to shirdi with the coconunt and some of his friends During their journey, they needed a place to rest and eat. They had some food, a type of fried snack called ‘Chivda in Marathi which is made from gram flour and can be quite spicy. When they found the Chivda too spicy, one of their friends suggested breaking the coconut into the Chivda to reduce the spiciness. with that intention they break the coconut that was given by tembe swami they become completely unaware that it is someone's trust and that they have no right to break and eat it but they broke the coconut and mixed it into the Chivda to reduce the spiciness. After doing so, they continued their journey and eventually reached Shirdi. Upon arriving in Shirdi, Baba knows everything Baba asks about the item that His friend had sent, and Pandalik Rao realizes that they have used the coconut by mixing it into the Chivda. He apologies Baba for his mistake and says,\"If you want, I can go to the market and buy another coconut for you.’ Baba explained that no matter how many coconuts you bring, none can compare to the one sent by a saint. This is because when a saint gives something to another saint, it is not merely an object but the essence of their inner feelings and devotion that comes with it. Such purity and devotion cannot be bought from any market. even if one were to bring hundreds of coconuts, none could match the sanctity and value of the one sent by Vasudevanand Saraswati. Then Pundalik Rao feels a lot of regret. when Baba sees his disappointment he says,'why are you inflicting yourself with the doership? You didn't eat or break it deliberately. It was the requirement of time \"So, it's okay. I was the coconut, I was also the sender, and the one who received it was not me,\" says Baba, reflecting on such deep thoughts. \"so don't inflict yourself with the ego of doership for no reason\" There are some verses related to this, which will make it clearer. In Chapter 51, Verse 175, Look How beautiful the verse which explains that no coconut can be compared with the one sent by vasudevanada saraswati in marathi is! \"baba mhanale tya falachi yogyata, yeina itar kitihi deta, - the coconut that He had sent for Me cannot be interchanged or compared with million such coconuts \"ghadavayache ghadle ata, vyart duschitta kimarth\" - What was meant to happen has happened. Now, why feel sad for it, needlessly? verse 176 - \"swamini tuj didla naral, tohi mhajaj sankalp keval, majyach sankalpe futle te phaal abhimaan nishfal ka dharisi\" the coconut which Swami Ji had given to you for me, it was my resolution that feeling should arise in his mind and the coconut should be given to you, in the moment of my resolution, Vasudevan Saraswati Ji had given you that coconut, and with my resolution it was broken and mixed into chivada so why you harbour egoistic attitude without any reason? And further He says, \"ahakaara chi dharisi buddhi, tene aapana manisi aparadhi, - because of egoistic attitude you regard yourself as offender \"avdhe nirhankartutva sadhi, avaghi upadhi chukel\" - just adopt the attitude of non doer and all the troubles can be avoided this crying, remorse, sorrow, all these titles will automatically dropped, just hold on to that egolessness, \"punyacha chi kai abhimaan, papacha ka nahi abhimaan\" - and it is the nature of man that when he does good deeds, then ego of that good deed comes along with it, so Baba says, where you will be proud of virtue, there will definitely be the shame and regret of sins also. If after doing any good deed, if you do not take the credit of doing it on your head, God forbid if you commit a small mistake, at that moment you will not take the credit of it as well because if you inculcate a habit not taking the credit for any good deed you give it's credit to God saying a lowly like me cannot execute such task if you do every good deed with this feeling, surrendering it to the Lord, considering Him to be the doer, if you keep yourself humble, then God forbid, if you commit any mistake, even a small one, then the feeling of non-doership that you keep while doing good deeds, the same feeling will give you the power of saying that Baba does it, it will come automatically, then Baba says, and if you are proud of your good deeds, then the pain, remorse, troubles of sins will definitely come, you will have to bear that as well If you nurture the pride of good deeds, then the pain of evil deeds will not let it live, therefore if you drop the pride virtue, then the pride of even small sins too shall drop on its own, and remember virtue is dangerous, and sin is also dangerous, beyond both is the soul, and beyond both is to attain that soul entity, therefore drop the pride of being a doer and become selfless, this is what Baba says to Pundalik Rao, It's a wonderful Leela, and Baba has highlighted every mystery of spirituality in Sai satcharitra through some Leela in very impeccable way Hence Sai satcharitra cannot be compared. I always say that several books were written on Baba when He was living and even today after 100 years of His Samadhi, innumerable books have being written. So, Baba knew it very well that people will wander in information The original spiritual treasure has to be given in their hands. These Leeels are just an excuse. Now non-doer ship is a spiritual aspect and to incorporate that non-doership into our life, He(Baba) crafted such an excellent divine leela of Pundalik rao So Sai satcharitra is a complete truth. And one thing should always be remembered, when Baba was alive, when he was in Shirdi, then those people who were very good devotees, when they used to go for Baba's darshan, Baba used to make them sit in the wada and used to set rules for them that you will read Gyaneshwari daily and after that you come for my darshan. Baba used to ask people to read Bhavarth Ramayana, Gyaneshwri, Eknathi Bhagwad and Ram vijay and there was a very strict warning that first you will complete reading and only after that you will come to DwarkaMai for my darshan, it means that how much importance those Grants had in Baba's mind is clearly visible from this If any devotee went directly to see Baba without completing the daily chapter, Baba would send them back, telling them to complete the chapter first and then come for his darshan. Baba gave so much importance to those scriptures because Baba knew that the original spiritual treasure is hidden in those scriptures You cannot connect to directly as your soul have not traveled to where I am. Therefore, first understand the depth in those scriptures let every sheath of it open up in your life and and then after that if you sit in front of me directly, then without me saying anything I will be able to put that entire light in you so it was clear to Baba that is why Baba always used to ask to read those Grants and today, when Baba felt that people will collect information about Me. There are people who give information and there are people who take information. Baba knew about this danger So, Baba poured all the important verses from Eknathi Bhagwad and Gyaneshwari in Sai satcharitra Sai satcharitra is crafted in this way hence there is no need of reading those scriptures mentioned earlier if Sai satcharitra is in hands as it is enough So, to explain the concept of Non-doership, Baba crafted this Leela that you have the ego of good deeds. That is why, when you commit a misdeed, you get pained, you get into trouble, you get filled with remorse, your mind becomes sad. So, Baba clarified that, while doing Pund (good deeds), if you dedicate those deeds to Sadguru, if you do not bring the ego of doing good deeds in your life, then, God forbid, if you do minor mistakes, then at such time, the power of saying that Baba is the doer of it will increase Now see, the biggest question is that 'I am not the doer, I am non-doer, on which devotee does this statement apply? Because the devotee who is in the primary stage, who is just living spirituality, if he takes this statement in his life, then he will get trapped. Because the ignorance is to be burnt to ashes, the impurity is to be burnt to ashes, right now wrong deeds are also being done by hands, and at such a time if it is said that i am not the doer, it is God who does it, it is written in the scriptures, then it means that my every sin, every deed is being done by my Sadguru, if the devotee who is in the initial state, takes it upon himself, then he will be destroyed, he will be completely ruined. So that is why the need of doership in the beginning is absolutely necessary. Yes I am the doer, in the beginning of spiritual practice, because there one has to work hard on one's vices, on one's desires, on the impurities of one's mind. There, the sattvic (pure) sense of doership is absolutely necessary. Therefore, if you don’t have that sense of doership at the beginning, you won’t be able to put in that force. I’m talking about the beginning of sadhana. A question might arise why I’m saying this. It’s not my opinion; Baba himself is saying it. Referring to the Sai Satcharitra, The Sai Satcharitra, Chapter Sixteen, Verse 80. It says that the sense of doership is absolutely necessary at the beginning. Without it, you cannot apply that force in sadhana, worship, or selfless action. If there is no sense of doership or pride in it, Baba says,' abhyas ani shram rokade, karu lagati hadachi kade,tai te guru krupa ujiyade, hati lage halu halu' Baba says, ‘Practice and effort are the currency in the spiritual world.’ This currency must be given; effort and practice mean you have to make an effort, not just by imagining that i'm not the doer, i'm not the doer Baba says that practice and effort make the bones of the body as dry sticks. When stick becomes dry, it easily breaks. Similarly, these bones need to be transformed into dry sticks with your efforts You will have to put in that much effort. Only then will the grace of the guru descend into our lives. Gradually, the spiritual treasure will start coming into our lives. And I will recite a verse from Chapter 48, Verse 44 - 'karm matr mi karnar, samarth hari guru fhal denar' aisa jayacha drud nirdhar, beda paar tayacha' I will do actions, now here 'i' came but this 'i' is pure because we are talking about worship (upasana) and spiritual practice (sadhana). we are talking about devotion, wisdom and renunciation. I have to put efforts for this and my Almighty Sadguru will make it futile but i have to do the Purushartha I will do the karma but the fruit will be given by my Samart Hari Guru, a person with such immense faith will cross this worldly ocean. It is clear that in the beginning, the pride of my 'I', you may call it pure(Satvik) pride, but it is needed in the beginning of sadhana, therefore, this feeling of non-doing will come at a very later stage, this pure 'i' is needed for devotion, for performing Karma Yoga, to attain renunciation. So, this pride 'i' is pure not impure and further He says in chapter 2 verse 162 'apuli sadsatvichar buddhi, apule sadhan chitshuddhi, te jhugaruni jo kubuddhi, guru kai siddhi taya' For doing Purusharth, pure 'i' is needed. If we do not fill our intellect with what is right and what is wrong and one has to attain purity of mind with one's Purshartha only Here efforts and force are to be exerted. And unless this conscience and purity of mind is achieved, our lives will not be bestowed with spiritual treasure the wicked minded who neglect these two aspects won't receive Guru's grace so all these verses clears that in the beginning of sadhana when one has to show enthusiasm, have to work hard, have to do sadhana, have to work hard on one's desires, have to work hard on one's vices, then that force is required there, that pure I is needed, that doership is needed, without that you will not be able to apply that force in sadhana, now all these sayings I have taken which have come from Sai Satcharitra are applicable in the initial stage of sadhana, I have taken one verse from sixteenth chapter, second ovi from forty-eighth chapter, 3rd Ovi from the second chapter, so such is the craft of Sai Satcharitra. You have to go through the entire Sai satcharitra if you want to develop a subject well. And see, after making so much effort, when you sincerely invest your body, mind, money in making efforts, then despite that sometimes your mind is not purified, sometimes you do not attain God and you will never attain Him because that is not something that can be attained by our efforts. But still, efforts are needed so that we can be worn out. so that our pride, our ego that if I do it, I will get it, then this sadhna works to destroy it. We are worn out, and that weariness holds a lot of significance in the spiritual world that I have put in my 100%, but still I have not received Baba's blessings. Although, You have not received that blessings, but you are not even aware that in making that effort, your pride, your ego of being a doer gets dissolved, gets weak. and after that the Sadguru comes once and says, why are you doing this unnecessarily, carrying the ego of doership, in reality nothing will happen by your doing, you should drop this doership, if this thing is said by Sadguru in the life of any devotee who is well established on that stage and says that you should drop your doership, then at that time that doership drops, then that saying applies to that stage, but if someone takes that saying on his head in the absolute initial state, then he will be ruined he will meet destruction, therefore, which saying is for devotee at what stage should be known, Sai Satcharitra has all kinds of sayings, but the very important aspect is that there should be clarity whether this saying applies to me at this stage or not while reading Sai Satcharitra did not make any effort at all, did not make any effort to drive out your desires, to drive out your vices, did not wear out and if you directly took the responsibility of non-doing on your head, then the filth of the mind will remain the same and then you just adopt that thought, nothing is going to happen from it, on the contrary, you will commit mistakes and then on top of that you will impose that Baba is the doer, No, this is not the essence behind this and maximum people commit this mistake, therefore, it seemed that this is a very important aspect, it should come in front of the world, that is why I have taken up this topic and when you reach that stage where your ego has melted, your doership has weakened, at that time, Sadguru comes and says that you are not the doer and at that time, when that Sadguru puts those words, it settles in every vein of ours because those words descended at the right time, not untimely and at that time, then that first saying which that there is no need of sadhan nor wisdom of scriptures There should be steadfast faith that Guru alone is the Protector and the destroyer. This saying is then applicable. There is no need for spiritual practice because you are done, now there is no need for it. You have done whatever you had to do and in doing that your ego has melted and become weak. Now it can be dropped very easily. That effort has not been wasted. What people do is they apply it every time. As if these three-four verses of Purushartha has no connection with their life. They will directly cover themselves with non-doer ship it is a dangerous thing. When your pure ego, pure doership falls then at that time Sadguru gives this advice from chapter 19 verse 74 Nobody else in the entire universe has the capability to make people realize the Self. If anyone has that capability, then it is my Guru and Hari. That feeling comes in latter stage, but there are many people in this world who impose these words on themselves and commit the biggest sins and they say that no They are not the doer, keep the feeling of non-doer and keep on doing misdeeds. In the world, there are people who preach this. It's is a very dangerous game so please understand this thing very well that which word is applicable for which devotee at which stage of sadhna, unless you understand this through and if you adopt every word on yourself, you will ruin your life, soul-knowledge is a far-fetched thing, you will not even be able to become a good human being, it is a big danger, so please listen to what I am saying very carefully, understand it and implement it in your life very well and always keep that non-doership while doing good deeds and while doing bad deeds, remember that you are doing it, Sadguru does not make you do it, when you are doing good deeds, then your feeling that Lord you are the doer makes more sacred act but when in the beginning any mistake happens, then one should weep and shed tears that Lord, this has happened by me, means there should be that much clarity in the beginning, but if in the beginning itself, if you impose that promise on yourself, then it is a disaster. There is a saying in Marathi, Maharastrians know it better, it is said - Prayatnanti Parmeshwar, it means that you reached pinnacle of your efforts, you completely exhausted yourself in that effort, in sadhana, worship, in karma yoga, bhakti yoga, in meditation yoga, in gyan yoga, inspite of exhausting yourself in every way, when one does not attain the knowledge of God, when you are completely tired, at that time Sadguru comes down and says, hey Krishna, why are you doing this unnecessarily, drop your feeling of being the doer whatever you have done, I made it happen, and after today whatever will happen, I will do it, and as one is worn out with efforts those word enters our heart like Amrit Sanjivani, settles in our every vein, that is the right time to imbibe those word, like it is said that if you put a seed on rocky ground, it will not bear fruit, its shoots will not sprout because the land has not been ploughed, it has not been made fertile, so if you go and directly sow a seed on rocky ground, it will not bear fruit, it will dry up, but if you dig and plough the land and make it fertile, then if that seed falls in it, the land holds it and then it gives infinite times more fruit, it becomes fertile, so similarly if that seed of non-doing falls at the right time, it becomes fruitful, but if you put it on on the beginning, At the right time the Sadguru did not put those word in your mind, but you took it willingly, then it is very dangerous. But these words has been said then one thing can be done at the max that whenever any good deed happen, Lord, a person like me cannot do such a holy work, it would not have been possible without your mercy, Lord, I give full credit for this to you, This feeling should arise from every fiber of your being and if such feeling is carried within us, then it is a great thing, but where the mistake occurs then the feeling should directly arise that I take the credit for this on my head and we should pray with tears that this will not happen again Baba, if there is so much clarity then the depth of non-doing has entered our mind and see, after all this, there is an verse, how can we attain the original non-doership, now to have the thought of non-doership is a different thing and to experience non-doership is a different thing, there is a vast difference. Today 99.99% of people who understand non-doership, are inclined towards it ideologically it's just our pure thought that i am not the doer but we have not yet experience. And Baba serves it in a wonderful verse which can be said as the soul of this talk I'll end this talk on that verse and understand it carefully as it is the only verse where Baba has unfolded the secret of having the experience of Non-doership Chapter 27 verse 185 - 'mann sankalvikalpadhin, kara sai pai samarpan, mag tethun pave je sfuran, tyache ahampam tya javal' He says that mind is prone to resolutions and contradictions always it is engrossed in duality of yes or no So this is the nature of the mind, it makes resolutions and contradictions, it keeps humans entangled, its job is to entangle, surrender it at the feet of Sai but how? when our mind gets immersed in the devotion of God, suppose I am sitting with a chapter and I have forgotten the world and myself, each and every verse of that chapter is descending into the depth of my heart and streams of tears are flowing from my eyes, so if the mind is offered to him in this way, then it is surrendered at the feet of the Sadguru because his contemplation is going so deep that at that time no thought of the world exists. There is no thought of self, no thought of time, how much time has passed, it is not known in the state of deep meditation, deep contemplation, meditation or deep listening, if we can forget ourselves and the world, and forget time, that state is called if you put your mind in God, then it has been surrendered at His feet and further goes on to say, it is a very important line, when the mind is completely surrendered at His feet, then after surrendering, whatever thought comes in the mind, whatever thought arises, remember as the mind has been completely surrendered at His feet then every thought in such state comes from Guru. You have no doer ship on these thoughts it is not from your mind not from the thoughts of your lifetime’s sanskars but you have surrendered that mind-resolve-contradict-oriented at the feet of God,You have surrendered yourself at the feet of the Sadguru, you have immersed your mind in his devotion after that if any thoughts come in the mind, then they come from there, you are not making it form meaning that is called real non-doing and at such a time any bad thought cannot come and it is impossible to do a bad deed because that mind has merged in the feet of the God, meaning that Baba has made one thing clear here that just by holding the thought of I am not doer in a conceptual way will not work because along with this thought of the intellect, the resolution and contradictions of the mind will also have to be completely surrendered at the feet of the Sadguru and only after that you attain real non-doership then it is very important verse, I believe that whenever you contemplate on non-doership, then Chapter 27, verse 185 should settle in your veins because until this mind gets completely immersed in God, until it is not immersed like that, then whatever thoughts arise inside it, then they are ours, but when the mind gets completely immersed in God, it forgets you, the world, time, at such a high state, when that mind becomes unmindful, then after such a time every thought that arises in it has come from Sadhguru, that person has no hand in that thought. That is akarta, that is called akartapan, To put on non-doership is a different thing and to go into original non-doership and experience it is a different thing, but what we do, 99.99% of the people apply non-doership on our heads only at the ideological level, we have not yet attained original Akartapan. I hope this talk must have descended in your mind and heart, it is very subtle, I will say it again that do not assume that you have understood completely after watching any video once. It is my humble request at your feet that please watch these videos again and again and related to this, if you have any question please ask Madam Kini asks if it is important to do all spiritual practices, or if any one of them can lead to non-doership. Look I have cleared it in today's tali that assume i am able to look at the ignorance within me and i completely tired of it and And every fiber of my being says that I should come out of this ignorance as soon as possible. This yearning has awakened within me. So, more the yearning more are the efforts then to fall out of that ignorance, he does selfless action, does bhaktiyoga, acquires knowledge, means his yearning makes him do all these things, so in reality, the more the yearning one has, the more one does the sadhana, if yearning is very superficial then you would mold yourself in any one practice If the yearning is very intense and you have to overcome that ignorance, you are troubled, you feel that instead of living in ignorance, it is better to die, if you have adopted that level of renunciation, Even without wanting to, you will still want to make every effort. So, it depends on how much your yearning is. If the intensity is strong, then all kinds of efforts or practices will naturally occur through you. and if the desire is not that intense, then you can reach that non-doership by holding on to any one Sadhana, it is not like that you cannot reach, but there is a difference between the two, reaching non-doing by holding on to any one Sadhana, and if anyone reaches it through complete route by doing many sadhana but then the destination of both is different, one attains Mukti, the other moves towards Moksha, so this difference will always remain, rest the choice is yours. Om sai ram krishnaji, a devotee worships Baba or Baba makes it happen through him. Baba enters on our life when we are even unaware of His name and acquaints us either by removing us from any trouble or by fulfilling our desire and then we start worshiping Him It's the indisputable reality. In the beginning if He doesn't enter in our life then we won't even know about Him with this reality he himself enters in our life, he lifts us from some trouble or fulfills our desire and He Himself immerses us in His devotion. So, it's a fact that we cannot worship Him without His compassion Baba makes us start but after a certain time, Baba pulls His hand off us in the beginning, he makes us do bhakti by keeping his hand for a long time, but after a certain time, Baba takes His hands of supports off and tells us to achieve Him by Purushartha. Till now I gave the push to your devotion now attain me with your own efforts it can be seen in a way, there is a combination, in the beginning we do bhakti by Baba's grace, after a point of time, he stops giving chocolates, he even stops giving experiences and evaluates how much you have sustained His devotion by keeping faith and patience. So, there is difference in stages and both are required With this i end today's session and then once again millions of salutations at your feet Jai Sai Ram",
    "Description": "अकर्तापन की साधना — उच्चतम आध्यात्मिक अनुभव की ओर एक अनमोल मार्ग।\nइस दिव्य यात्रा में, कृष्णाजी के मार्फत हम उन गूढ़ प्रश्नों के उत्तर जानेंगे जो हर साधक के हृदय में उठते हैं:\n🌿 उच्चतम साधना की अवस्था में अकर्तापन का क्या महत्व है और इसे पाने का सर्वोच्च साधन क्या है?\n🌿 प्रारंभिक साधक क्या स्वयं को अकर्ता मानकर अपनी साधना में पूर्ण समर्पण कर सकता है?\n🌿 वासुदेवानंद सरस्वती जी द्वारा भेजा गया नारियल क्यों था एक दिव्य संदेश?\n🌿 ग्लानि, दुःख और पश्चाताप से मुक्ति कैसे संभव है — क्या सचमुच इनका पराभव हो सकता है?\n🌿 क्या ‘साईं सतचरीत्र’ जैसा दिव्य ग्रंथ और कोई हो सकता है या यह ही है साईं बाबा की अनंत महिमा का सम्पूर्ण प्रकाश?\n\nआइए, इस पावन प्रवचन में कृष्णाजी के शब्दों से अपनी आत्मा को आलोकित करें और उस शाश्वत शांति को अनुभव करें जो अकर्तापन की साधना में निहित है।\n\nॐ साईं राम 🙏✨\n\nThe Practice of Non-Doership — A Priceless Path to the Highest Spiritual Experience.\nIn this divine journey, through the guidance of Krishna Ji, we explore profound questions that arise in every seeker’s heart:\n🌿 What is the significance of non-doership (akartā) in the highest state of spiritual practice, and what is the supreme method to attain it?\n🌿 Can a beginner seeker consider themselves a non-doer and still devote themselves fully to their sadhana?\n🌿 Why was the coconut sent by Vasudevananda Saraswati Ji such a divine message?\n🌿 How is liberation from guilt, sorrow, and regret possible — can these truly be overcome?\n🌿 Is there any other scripture that can compare to the divine ‘Sai Satcharitra’, or is it the complete and ultimate revelation of Sai Baba’s infinite glory?\n\nJoin us in this sacred discourse as Krishna Ji’s words illuminate the soul, guiding us to experience the eternal peace inherent in the practice of non-doership.\n\nOm Sai Ram 🙏✨ …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "4,976 views",
    "Likes": "331"
  },
  {
    "Title": "How to avoid lust",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6lsw75zevAA",
    "Transcript": "The name of the topic is how to avoid or get rid of desire of objects of senses. Under this topic I will take a leela. Chana(chickpeas) Leela Once upon a time, One sunday Hemad Pant, there used to be a weekly market in Shirdi on Sundays when Baba was there, came from the market wearing a shirt and a coat with folds. He came to attend the noon Aarti of Baba and sat near Baba. A devotee noticed that there were chickpeas stuck in the folds of the his coat. He was surprised. Baba then asked him to open the folds. As soon as he did, 20-25 chickpeas fell out from the folds. The first wonder was that there were 20-25 chickpeas stuck in the folds. Baba used to play such divinity to give teachings. Now this is miracle and His every miracle has some secret, some wisdom. They were not done without any reason. in a fold of sleeve one or two chickpeas can stay but 20-25 chickpeas is unreal And if 24-25 chickpeas are stuck, imagine the discomfort! Hemad Pant should have noticed this discomfort much earlier and cleaned it up. But Baba, in his divine play, made sure that 25 chickpeas were stuffed in those folds, and Hemad Pant didn’t even realize it. This is the divine play. Some people mock Hemad Pant, thinking he has a habit of eating alone. So, after coming from the market, he must have been chewing chickpeas, which got stuck in the folds of his coat. Hemad Pant said, 'No, I haven’t done anything like that. I really didn’t come here eating chickpeas; I don’t understand how so many chickpeas ended up in my folds. When someone is in front of me, I always offer them first, and only if something is left do I eat it myself. These are my values. then Baba says, \"Hemad pant, it is true that as long as there is someone in front of you, you do not eat without offering it to them, I also know this, but if there is no one in front of you, even then am I not in front of you, do you offer it to me first, before eating.\" there Himarpand remains completely stunned, \"yes Baba, you are in front of me 24 hours a day, you are there everywhere, all the time, really i have never offered or remembered You Baba says, \"Hemad pant, always remember one thing in life, these five subjects, word, touch, form, taste and smell, these are very dangerous, whenever you start enjoying these five, then first of all remember me,\" do not taste them directly, word, touch, form, taste and smell.\" Words means, if you feel like listening to good music, Suppose you felt an intense desire to listen to a newly released movies songs and you bought cassette or CD for fulfilling the purpose and listened, but did not remember Baba, so that is a sin in Baba's eyes, if I talk about this chapter, then Baba warns before listening to introspect, \"if my senses are running towards this subject of my senses, then I have to remember Baba first, Baba has said that I do not have to consume that subject of senses directly\" first I have to remember Baba, ok why did Baba say so, Because when someone is eager to enjoy something and if you have to remember or chant in the middle of it, then its intensity is diminished and it is Baba's wholesome purpose No guru in the world could have provided this insight on overcoming the senses to their disciples. that do not cherish the objects of senses without remembering me First And always remember, whenever the urge to indulge in any sense experience arises, for example if a sexual desire arises between husband and wife which is natural—don't directly engage in the act. Baba says to first chant his name eighteen times calmly and with devotion. Only then should you engage in the act. make this a habit For instance, if delicious food is in front of you, don’t just grab it and eat it immediately. Baba advises to first chant his name eighteen times with a peaceful and loving mind before indulging. This applies to any sensory experience: after chanting Baba's name, you can eat the food, indulge in the desire, listen to music, or use perfume. Smell is attracting as of to mask the odor of sweat in summers do use it but after remembering Baba's name for 18 time peacefully and calmly so that if your mind engages in the chant for 18 times then automatically the intensity of desire for objects of senses will decrease If you feel attracted to something, don’t directly indulge in it. Remember Baba’s name first. Although Baba did not specify eighteen times in his teachings, I am adding this from my own perspective. Even after chanting Baba’s name eighteen times with complete attention, you may indulge in it but with time the intensity of the desire will decrease, you will be able to detach from the sensory experience. Baba in chapter 24 verse 42 says, \"What I mentioned earlier first remembering Me and then indulging in the experience. Baba says that even though it might seem like a small thing, it is actually a significant challenge.\" When the urge of desire arises, even chanting Baba’s name eighteen times can be very difficult. Baba warns that while this may seem like a minor element, it is crucial for overcoming desire. especially Rasana(taste). Without defeating taste one cannot enter the spiritual world impossible! Do you know the difference between a householder and ascetic? If a householder works on controlling his lust and taste, he ultimately becomes like an ascetic. If a householder controls his/her desires and taste, then he/she is essentially living as a renunciant, even while remaining in household life. And Baba is telling this in chapter 44 that whenever the mind runs towards the subjects, then one should not go and enjoy them directly, one should stop, one should remember Baba eighteen times, after that the intensity of that tendency will drop, its impulse will not be that much when the tendency arose, automatically its impulse will reduce, its intensity will reduce. After that, if you still cannot control yourself then you go forward next time, then eighteen times means you have to rein in that tendency, do not get directly involved Next verse which is one of the most important verse of Sai satcharitra is verse number 43 'vishayi jaiyasi havyas, parmarth n dhari tayachi aas' - the one who wants to remain indulge in the desires for objects of senses never achieves Paramarth(supreme purpose) One will have no association with paramarth if one does not have the ability to rein in their desires for objects of the senses. And further, Baba says that when one reins in these objects of the senses by chanting Baba's name 18 times, then paramarth becomes enslaved to them. these are some important verses and now i take some more verses, verses 46 to 50 from chapter 24 Baba says. - 'mann budhyadi indriyagan, karu adarita vishaysevan, karave adhi majhe smaran, tai maj samarpan anshanahe' if a thought to enjoy the sensual objects arises like listening to song, devouring a food, indulging in sexual activities or any other thought for sensual objects then remember Me first and in this way that desire for objects of senses will be subdued thereby diminishing its intensity you won't be able to enjoy it directly and completely and the more rapidly we enjoy the objects, the tendency gets more stronger. And if you want to reduce the intensity of that tendency, then first remember me and then indulge in that object. And if you remember me then in reality you are not only remembering, but you are dedicating the intensity of that tendency to me. This is what He is saying. And it is impossible for the senses to remain without sensual desires. If there are eyes, they will see, if there is nose, it will smell, if there is skin, the feeling of sexual desire will arise, if there is tongue, it will pull towards taste, so it is not so easy to get rid of this. If the senses remain devoid of sensual desires, It is not possible until the end of the cosmic cycle. And if that sensual object is surrendered at the feet of the Guru, then the intensity of attachment will decrease. And how is that surrender to be done? By remembering Him. To remember Him is to surrender to Him, remember this. Its intensity has to be ended, its impulse has to be ended. And going further he says, - 'kaam tari madvishaich kamave, and even if any desire arises, then at that time too, with the same force, surrender to me, turn the speed of that lust towards me, and even if anger arises, then surrender to me before getting angry, take my name eighteen times, after that be angry, develop this habit, then the tendency will automatically start reducing, this is a wonderful idea given by Baba, and this has been given to us by a Samarth Sadguru, do not take it lightly, no guru in the world would have explained these things in such a wonderful way, no guru in the world, 'kaam tari madvishayich kamave, kop aalya majvarich kopave, abhimaan duragrah samrpave, bhakti vahave madmadi' and in this way, if you are indulging in lust, also remember me, and even while experiencing the vices, lust, anger, greed, attachment, greed, pride, when these six vices attack you, then go into their impulse directly, first reduce their intensity by praying to Baba, and even then if they do not stop, then it is okay, Baba says, 'I will handle them' but i will see whether you have remembered me 18 times and even if you indulge in ti after that then in my view it's not a sin' It is a very significant matter and a very profound one. 'kaam krodh abhimann, vritti jav uthti kadkadun, mi ek laksh lashun, majvari nikshun sodavya' when tendencies like lust, anger, ego, pride arises when they arises ragingly then deviate that intensity towards me. Don't implement it directly over someone with anger or pride. be alert on the emergence of that tendency and first remember me 18 times and in this way Sadguru will lessen it's intensity till it is completely erased some might take 2 years, some may take 6 years or some may take 12 years and if it takes more than 12 years that means you have not worked in right direction otherwise in 12 years all these tendencies should end so how to get rid of these sensual desires? This is the only way You had once mentioned to me a line that I always remember and that we can keep in mind like a fundamental mantra. Firstly, you mentioned that the tongue, which is involved in tasting, is the foundation for everything else. If one does not control the tongue, it is impossible to control anything else. For example, if someone says they have controlled their desires but hasn't controlled their tongue, it is impossible. Look, if there is a master in the five senses, it is the tongue. The remaining four senses are hidden within this desire of the tongue. The senses of sound, touch, sight, and smell are all in the tongue. If a person controls the tongue, the other four senses will automatically come under control. If one cannot control the tongue, especially as a householder they should eat whatever is necessary, but if something is very dear to them, Baba used to say, \"If you need something, give up something dear to you.\" The purpose was to gradually let go of the desire for those things. Does anyone have any questions related to this? Om Sai Ram, Krishna Ji, and all Sai devotees, many greetings. My question is: you said that one should chant the name 18 times, but how can one chant the name before getting angry? Anger comes suddenly, so please tell me how one can chant the name before becoming angry. Today, you have heard for the first time that before becoming angry, one should chant the name 18 times. Try to make an effort; maybe you will be able to take the name once or twice, and then it will pass. Or initially, it is important to remember that he suggested chanting the name 18 times, Remembering that Baba said to chant the name 18 times before anger arises is already a big achievement. Even if you can't chant 18 times, just remembering to chant at all is progress. As you practice more, you might be able to chant it twice, then gradually four times, and eventually, you might reach 18 times. Baba will help you reach that goal gradually. Please remain assured about this. In the beginning, Chanting 18 times is a challenging task, i understand and as Baba himself said that it might seem trivial and easy to chant the name 18 times before the urge arises, but it is not trivial. It's i big task. However, with practice, if you can chant even 18 times, the hold of that urge will weaken. Whether it's an urge related to desires, taste, sound, or smell, its intensity will decrease over time. Even if you can't manage 18 times, chanting three times and remembering to do so is a lot that Krishna Ji mentioned this from Sai satcharitra Baba has sown this seed in you that whenever urge arises you have to chant. This is not a small thing. This is a beginning of Divine journey.",
    "Description": "“This attack of sensuality will not go away just like that…\n\nKeep chanting the name of Sai, never be compelled…\n\nStop, pause and chant the name of Sai once…\n\nYou have faith in the Sadguru,\n\nYou will become completely selfless.”\n\n🕉️ Shri Sai Satcharitra | Chapter 24 | Chana Leela – A unique method of liberation from sensuality\n\n🎙️ With Krishnaji’s spiritual interpretation\n\n🎧 Spiritual interpretation and soulful narration by Krishnaji\n\n“This attack of sensuality will not go away just like that…\n\nKeep chanting the name of Sai, never be compelled…”\n\nIn this chapter, Sai Baba has directly attacked that internal weakness of ours, which hinders our sadhana the most – sensuality.\n\nShri Sai’s Chana Leela is not just an ordinary event but a profound spiritual message —\n\nthat when the senses become unbalanced, the seeker should bind his mind in the rosary of “Sai Naam”.\n\n🌼 Why did Baba warn the seekers against sensual desires while chewing roasted grams?\n\n🌼 Are desires limited only to the body, or do they become an obstacle in the path of the soul?\n\n🌼 How can “Sai Naam” destroy attachment to sensual desires?\n\nIn this powerful chapter, Sai Baba reveals a simple yet profound truth:\n\n“Desire is the enemy of peace — and the remedy lies in the constant remembrance of the Guru’s name.”\n\nThrough the symbolic act of chewing roasted grams (chana), Baba demonstrates how discipline, detachment, and divine remembrance can defeat even the strongest temptations.\n\n👉 Krishnaji, through his serene and spiritual narration, brings forth:\n\nThe deep meaning behind Baba’s Chana Leela\nWhy sensual cravings derail spiritual progress\nHow unwavering Naam Simran (chanting of the Guru’s name) becomes armor against worldly desires\n💫 The seeker who finds the coolness of “Sai Naam” in the fire of sensual desires, ultimately attains perfection of the soul.\n💫 The one who clings to the Guru’s name amid storms of temptation, walks fearlessly toward liberation.\n\n🙏 Listen to this wonderful Leela, go within, and make “Sai Naam” the center of your Sadhana.\n\nThis trick of Baba not only shows the path, but also protects from evil.\n\n🙏 Let this sacred teaching protect your soul and lead you from bondage to bliss.\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiSatcharitra #Chapter24 #ChanaLeela #Krishnaji #SpiritualDetachment #SaiNaam #SubjectVikaar #SpiritualSalvation #ShraddhaSaburi #SaiWisdom …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "8,526 views",
    "Likes": "491"
  },
  {
    "Title": "जब सुबह की आरती खत्म हुई और बाबाने अश्नान किया .....",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D5uMrxMwq8k",
    "Transcript": "Now I will take a song, we will conduct a satsang on this song - Sai Darbar - 'Jab subah ki aarati khatm hui'. How many people have heard this song? Oh wow, maximum people have heard it, very good, this is a very lovely song, this song is when we used to sit in Samadhi Mandir for Kakadarti, then during Mangalsnan(sacred bathe) two-four Bhajans were taken, letters, this song was one of them, played in the Samadhi Mandir And the devotees' tears wouldn't stop, that is this song. whoever must have heard it, must have experienced it, that is his/her own experience, 'Dheeraj rakh wo rahmat ki barkha barsa bhi dega' - This is also a hymn that was often sung. see this song - 'jab subah ki aarati khatam hui aur Baba ne asnan kiya' the fifth devotion in nine fold devotion is Archana bhakti, this song is complete Archana bhakti, if you want to understand the depth of Archana bhakti, then understand this song, what is true worship? If you want to understand then you have to understand this song because probably no other song can highlight the Archaan bhakti in such a better way than this song. The full depth of this song is that when you involve yourself in Archaan bhakti, anoint God, wipe with a clean cloth, apply sandalwood paste, dress with clothes and ornaments, adorn with flower garlands, and place a crown. Afterwards, you offer incense, lamp, and Naivedya (food offering). All these together constitute 'archan bhakti' Many people practice this 'archan bhakti' in their homes. Everyone has a prayer room in their homes. There are idols of Baba in their homes, and this 'archan bhakti' is performed by everyone with their own feelings and devotion. But how should the Archan bhakti be, this song tells us. If you are engaged in the worship of Baba with your body. This body is bathing Baba, dressing Baba with clothes and ornaments, adorning Baba with flower garlands. But if your mind is preoccupied with worldly thoughts. It means it is merely a physical exercise. You are doing it just because you do it daily. But if your mind is not in it, then it is not true devotion. Kabir Ji says in a couplet, 'The rosary moves in the hand, the tongue moves in the mouth. The mind roams in all directions, this is not true remembrance. So, while the rosary moves in the hand, and the mouth chants 'Om Sairam, Om Sairam, Om Sairam,' But if the mind is wandering across the entire universe, Kabir Ji says, this is not true remembrance. Similarly, if you are performing Baba's archan devotion but your mind is not focused, then that archan devotion is not true devotion; it is not true worship. I even say, and some people might feel bad, that if I am in the Samadhi Mandir, even if I am the priest of the Samadhi Mandir, I am fortunate to bathe Baba every day, but if my emotional state is not as elevated as it should be during the service, then even while being in the Samadhi Mandir, I am very far away. So, leave aside our homes, I am talking about the Samadhi Mandir. Archan bhakti should not be like that. I will share an incident. Once, in Dwarkamai, among the devotees sitting in front of Baba, there were two devotees, one from Nagpur and one from Bombay. In those days, Sathe Wada was the only place where everyone gathered. Both devotees were staying in Sathe Wada, and the one from Bombay said, 'Let's go for Baba's darshan in Dwarkamai.' The one from Nagpur replied, 'No, I have been here for 15 days and will stay for another month because, in those days, people stayed for months. There is a show in Kopargaon, a woman's dance, and I am going to see it. I will come back later for Baba's darshan. I am going to stay here for another month.' The one from Bombay said to the one from Nagpur, 'What a lowly person you are, You have come to a holy place, and you still want to watch a woman's dance.' The one from Nagpur said, 'No, but my mind is telling me that today is the last day of the show, so I will go and watch it and come back in the evening for Baba's darshan.' The one from Bombay said, 'Go, as you wish.' Now, the one from Bombay goes for Baba's darshan in Dwarkamai and, after 10-15 minutes, starts getting bored sitting in Dwarkamai. He starts thinking, 'I wish I had also gone to watch the show. I could have come back in the evening for Baba's darshan.' Meanwhile, the other person, who had said he would go to the show, was sitting there watching it, but tears were streaming down his face. That there could be no one worse than me. Even on such sacred ground, my tendencies pulled me here. Baba forgive me\" He is watching a show but with tears of repent. And he is sitting in front of Baba in Dwarkamai, saying, 'I wish I had gone to watch the show.' So Baba tells that person in Dwarkamai, 'He is here, and you are there.' The person does not understand what Baba meant by 'He is here, and you are there.' In the evening, they meet again, and they start talking. The person asks, 'How was the show?' He replies, 'What show, man? I went there, but my mind didn't stay there for a moment. I was in a terrible state, crying the whole time. I shouldn't have gone there.' When the other person hears this, he realizes, 'Baba gave me the answer to my question this morning. Now I understand what Baba meant by saying, \"He is here, and you are there.\" Because I was thinking, \"I wish I were there,\" and Baba said, \"You are here.\"' thus our physical proximity to any one doesn't prove anything if such was the case then the temple's priests for twelve years would have attained liberation. Baba looks at our inner self, at how pure our devotion is, how selfless our worship is, and how much sacrifices we can for Baba. If you have that courage then we are true devotees of Baba So this song 'jab subah ki aarati khatam hui' highlights what true archan devotion (archan bhakti) is. Serving and worshiping with just the body is not enough. Therefore, when body, mind, and wealth are completely dedicated, it takes the form of supreme devotion. When the body is engaged in Baba's service, the mind is focused on Baba, and wealth is also used in Baba's service, it is called supreme devotion. I would even say that if needed, the devotion of that devotee from Nagpur who was watching the show but still thinking about Baba is superior because his mind was focused on Baba, and it is more important for the mind to be focused than the body. Let me tell you an incident. There was a religious teacher who invited Jesus to his house for a meal. Many disciples of the religious teacher were present, and some of Jesus' disciples were also there. While they were having the meal, a prostitute found out that Jesus was at the religious teacher's house, so she ran to see him and fell at his feet. She started kissing his feet and washing them with her tears, then anointing them with perfume. The religious teacher sitting nearby had a thought: people call Jesus divine, but does he not know that the woman clinging to his feet is a prostitute? Why doesn't he rebuke her? This thought arose in the religious teacher's mind, and Jesus knew about it. Jesus then told the religious teacher a parable. He said that two people had debts: one owed fifty rupees, and the other owed five hundred rupees. Both debts were forgiven. Jesus asked the religious teacher, who would love the creditor more? The religious teacher thought and replied that the one with the debt of five hundred rupees would love more because his larger debt was forgiven. Jesus then said, 'Similarly, the sins in your heart are equal to the sins of this prostitute, but you are not repentant of your sins, whereas this prostitute is repentant and clings to my feet asking for forgiveness. Both have committed sins worth five hundred rupees, but this prostitute sees her sins as worth five million rupees, and that's why she is crying and repenting.' whereas your sins are of same worth as that of her's but your mind doesn't display the tears of repent. So here Jesus is indirectly saying to him that in His view she is a religious teacher and he is a prostitute This scene teaches us that how close we appear to Baba externally, how much worship we show the world, does not satisfy Baba. Baba looks at the pain we feel for our ignorance, the repentance in our heart, our tears, our crying, and our growing surrender to Him is what Baba considers nor our external actions. If we sit in front of Baba's idol for twenty-four hours but our mind is preoccupied with worldly thoughts, that is not true devotion. As Kabir Ji says, 'As long as there is attachment to the world, there is no true devotion. And he who removes worldly thoughts from his mind and places Hari in his mind, and becomes Hari's, gets rid of worldly thoughts, and thinks only of Hari, meditates only on Guru, indulges his mind in devotion to Guru only, he alone is the true devotee. Therefore, Kabir Ji says, if you want to learn the art of begging and fakirism, learn it from the water carrier. If you want to learn true devotion, true fakirism, learn it from those who carry water, walking miles and miles with pots on their heads. She talk to their friends about all sorts of things, gossiping about their mothers-in-law, but they never forget to keep their focus on the water pot. similarly, one who takes care of one's family, takes care of house takes care of society but does not forget Baba even for a moment is doing true Bhakti If you ask for a simple definition of a devotee, it is someone who dedicates their body to the world, fulfilling all worldly duties, earning money, taking care of the family, and performing all kinds of responsibilities, but never for a moment forgets God or Sadguru in his/her mind is the true devotee Therefore, in Chapter 10, verse 129, Baba says,' Mhanuni geh prapanchala sopa, Give your body to worldly affairs, - 'chit saicharani samarpa' - and your mind, heart, and soul to Baba's feet.' Dedicate your mind, heart, and soul to Baba's contemplation, and let your body be engaged in the world. If you do this, see how Baba showers His grace upon you. This is a simple way to attain supreme devotion: engage your body in worldly duties and your mind in God. But do you know what we do? We do the exact opposite. Have you ever thought about it? We engage our body in God's worship, performing rituals, adorning idols, and doing all kinds of physical activities, but our mind is preoccupied with worldly thoughts. While performing worship, our mind is busy thinking about the tasks left to do after going to work, but our hands are engaged in adorning the idol, Baba asks us to do the opposite: dedicate your body to the world and keep Me in your mind. This song highlights that aspect. Not only do you have to engage your body, but you must also worship with your mind and feelings, performing rituals with devotion. Last year, I took up a topic called 'Shirdi, jo Nar ko Narayan bana de,' and I explained the journey from physical Shirdi to subtle Shirdi. Starting from Dwarkamai, then Gurusthan, from Gurusthan to Nanda Deep, from Nanda Deep to Chavadi, and from Chavadi to the Samadhi Mandir—how a person traverses this spiritual journey and eventually becomes the Master of the universe. Yesterday, I met Uncle Mete, who said a wonderful thing that it's impossible to take darshan as you said. First, we visit Dwarkamai, then Gurusthan, followed by Nanda Deep in Lendi Baug, then Chavadi, and finally the Samadhi Mandir. Today, due to the increase in the crowd and changes in arrangements, we first have to queue up to visit the Samadhi Mandir. From there, we are taken directly to Gurusthan. Although I cannot physically follow that sequence, I perform mental worship. Every day, after waking up, I close my eyes and mentally worship all the five places everyday exactly as you described: first Dwarkamai, then Gurusthan, then Nanda Deep, from Nanda Deep to Chavadi, and finally from Chavadi to the Samadhi Mandir. Even if you can't physically go through this sequence, you can still perform mental worship. And to be honest, if you are physically present for the darshan but your mind is not engaged, then what is the benefit? The mental worship he is doing is a million times superior to the physical worship. The feeling should be that Baba my true spiritual journey should progress along this path. First, my place is at Dwarkamai, because all the impurities within me need to be burnt away. In the sacred dhuni (fire) all the vices and desires of my mind need to be burnt away. So, Baba, my status is still at Dwarkamai. If worship and rituals are performed with full devotion, and if the mind is equally engaged, then you will be filled to the brim with devotion. Now, let's return to the song. The refrain of the song goes: 'What I felt in Shirdi, I repeat today. Maybe you'll understand why I sing Sai's praises.' When I came to Shirdi and set foot in Baba's holy Samadhi Mandir after the Kakad Aarti, as soon as Baba's auspicious bath was over, that morning time, those vibrations, and the sight of that auspicious moment touched my heart deeply. Unintentionally, I started singing Baba's praises. His enchanting image is such that if the mind gets engaged once, it finds expression through words. Sometimes it comes out as poetry, and sometimes as a song. I didn't even realize when, while watching His enchanting form, this poetry, this song came out of my mouth. This is what he is saying. And in the first verse, he says that when the morning aarti ended and Baba took his bath. The Kakad Aarti takes place in the morning. As soon as Baba's auspicious bath began after the Kakad Aarti, seeing it, my sins were washed away, and I transformed from a sinner into a human being. Now see, Baba's auspicious bath. In reality, Baba has no form, but we have given Him a form. Baba has no shape, but we have given Him one. We made His idol and placed it for our convenience. However, Baba is nameless and formless; He is the all-encompassing consciousness of the entire universe. That is His true form. But for our convenience, we have bound Him to a form and a name to make it easier for us to worship Him. So, we gave Him a form and a name. Even if Baba took an avatar, it was for our convenience. If He came in a tangible form, it was only for our ease so that we could hear His words, see His conduct, understand how He lived, and be inspired to improve our lives. Therefore, He incarnated among us in the flesh. If He had not come in a tangible form, we would not have been able to worship Him So, the benefit of Him coming in a tangible form for us was that it provided us with a means to focus our minds through worship. Because we cannot directly meditate on His formless, attribute-less state, given the limitations of our minds, He took on a physical form, even though He is the all-pervading consciousness of the universe. He confined Himself to a stone idol and is sitting before us so that we can worship Him, and through this process, we can focus our minds.\" When the morning aarti ended and Baba took His bath, the person reflecting said, 'Baba, in reality, what need do You have for a bath? Who in the entire universe is as pure and conscious as You are? Your character, Your purity—no one in the entire universe matches that. Baba, You do not need a bath. However, I have made an idol of You and am performing the bath ritual so that my sins may be washed away. I am doing this worship, this auspicious bath for my own benefit, not because You need it. You are ever-pure, and it is the whole world that borrows purity from You. So why would You need an auspicious bath? Yet, as I perform this ritual, my focus on You increases, and my sins are being washed away. That is why I am performing this auspicious bath. What kind of deal is this do you know? If I were to tell you to go to a grocery store, give them a five hundred rupee note, nd ask for just ten grams of cumin seeds, would you do it? No one would. But Baba is making this deal with us. Baba is saying that I accept this very humble form of service from you. Through this service, you are offering me pebbles and stones—performing my bath, adorning me, dressing me, and decorating me with garlands. I do not need any of these things. You are giving me pebbles and stones in the form of service, and in return, I will grant you the jewel of self-knowledge. See how unprofitable the deal is? will a person give jewels in return for pebbles and stones. But the Sadguru gives us the jewel of wisdom, irrespective of our services. Whether we perform the bath or not, His character remains ever-pure. We dress Him in clothes, but what clothes can we offer to someone whose consciousness is as vast as the sky? Even then, we have created a form for Him, and we are dressing that form in clothes. Yet, He accepts this service, meaning He takes these pebbles and stones from us and, in return, gives us His completeness. He bestows upon us the jewels of wisdom. Who could be a greater trader than this in the world? Do you understand what I am saying? Our ordinary services—performing rituals, bathing, adorning with clothes, putting on garlands, offering incense, lamps, and food—are seen by Baba as insignificant services. He is ever satisfied. He is the eternal complete being. What can we dress or bathe such an all-encompassing consciousness like the sky? He is chidambar but he has showered His compassion over us by descending from His real form and spending 80 years with us in Shirdi, and then appearing in the form of a statue after leaving His physical body. This allows us to serve and worship Him, and thus engage our minds in devotion. He has made it convenient for us, but all our services are like pebbles and stones to Him, and He, in return, gives us His true form. So, while we might not ask for ten grams of cumin seeds for five hundred rupees, the Sadguru accepts our pebbles and stones and gives us precious jewels. Who could be a greater trader than this? Thus, while performing the ritual bath for His form, Baba does not need it, but through this ritual, my inner impurities are cleansed, my sins are washed away, and my mind is purified. This is why I perform the ritual bath for you. My mind is filled with filth and with a feeling to clean it I am performing bathe ritual or else you don't need it. and in second stanza when in the morning, a stream of milk and water was flowing over Sai's feet. I have forgiven even my enemies as I began to pour water and milk at His feet with complete devotion, my feelings of revenge, enmity, and bitterness towards others were washed away. While washing your holy feet You don’t need this service, but it was through this service that my mind was purified and my negative feelings or enmity towards others were removed. You, in idol form, are sitting before me and showering me with boundless grace, solely for my well-being and improvement. This is Your compassion. When, early in the morning, a new sheet was draped over Sai's idol, I discarded all my old garments and donned Sai robe. What a line it is, truly beautiful. When the new cloth was spread over Sai's Samadhi after the ritual in the morning, what was the result? It is impossible for us to cover Him completely. His expanse is such that it cannot be covered. With just one cloth, how can we cover Him? It is impossible. But by placing that one cloth on His Samadhi, The clothes that I had held onto in my mind have been cast aside simply by spreading a cloth over your samadhi. Now, which are the clothes i adorn myself with? stacked one over the other—like fame, pride, wealth, and worldly desires and desires for position, offspring, and wealth. There are countless such layers, Baba I am wearing the cloth of worldly pleasures, material possessions, or sensory experiences., the cloth of six vices, the cloth of seeking recognition from the world. I was adorned with these layers, wanting the world to give me respect and honor. By placing a single cloth on Your Samadhi, all my layers fell away. One by one, You removed the masks from my face. This is Your grace. By serving You, I am not doing You a favor; rather, You gave me the opportunity to serve, and in return, You have worn my layers. When in the early morning, a new cloth was spread over Sai, I discarded all my old garments and donned Sai robe. All the other layers of worldly pride and pretense have fallen away. Now, only one layer remains—the layer of Your true exclusive devotion all the contrary clothes or facade masks i had on i dropped all of it. All veils i had are set aside by me. Now, no veil covers my self There is only one attire, and it is that of your exclusive devotion. In the next stanza, it is said: When in the early morning, the priest placed the crown on Sai, I eradicated my own pride and became liberated within As soon as the jewel-encrusted crown was placed on You, Baba, the right to wear such a crown belongs only to You in the entire universe. As you have defeated Maya. Because you have conquered illusion (Maya), the crown rightfully belongs to you. However, as soon as the priest placed the jewel-encrusted crown upon you, I erased all the pride and honor of my life. I became internally liberated. My ego, pride, arrogance, and grandeur those false garments—I discarded. Now, my mind is immersed in renunciation (fakiri). Even though you wore the crown, the benefit is mine, Baba, because all my false pride, arrogance, and ego have vanished. I placed the crown on you, and I am grateful, Baba, that despite being the universal consciousness, you manifested in a physical form and have graced me with your presence in my home. I am fortunate to have received this opportunity for service, Baba. In the last stanza: As flowers began to shower upon Baba from all sides, For some reason, tears started pouring from my eyes, and I was amazed Sai, at how you blessed me so abundantly. I came with so many requests, but I received so much without even asking. devotees started the flower shower after the Mantrapushpanjali, I became overwhelmed with emotion, Baba. As countless flowers were showered upon you, tears of devotion flowed from my eyes. Perhaps as many tears flowed from my eyes as the flowers that were showered upon you. With each flower that showered upon you, my desires, wishes, and vices began to wash away. When I first came to you, before stepping into this court, I came with a list, Baba, intending to ask for many things. But witnessing your Aarti and the Mantrapushpanjali, and seeing the heartfelt devotion of the people as they showered flowers upon you, my desires began to diminish. Tears of devotion welled up in my eyes, I had come with a long list of requests, but seeing the devotional atmosphere, no desire could emerge from my mouth.",
    "Description": "Om Sai Ram 🙏\nIn this soul-stirring talk, Krishnaji takes us beyond melody—into mantra.\nLine by line, stanza by stanza, He unpacks the inner essence of a powerful devotional song ‘Jab Subah Ki Aarti Khatam Hui’. What might seem like poetic praise on the surface transforms—under His guidance—into a deep, meditative exploration of bhakti, surrender, and self-realization.\nKrishnaji doesn’t just explain the words—He reveals the living truth hidden within them.\nWhether you’ve sung this bhajan for years or are hearing it for the first time, this satsang will transform it into an experience. It’s not just about understanding the song… it’s about letting it enter your heart, awaken your devotion, and draw you closer to the Divine.\n🙏 Let every verse become a mirror.\nLet every note become a step inward.\nLet every meaning unfold as darshan.\n\nॐ साई राम 🙏\nइस हृदय को झकझोर देने वाले सत्संग में, कृष्णाजी हमें सुरों से, मंत्र की गहराई तक ले जाते हैं।\nपंक्ति दर पंक्ति, चरण दर चरण, वे एक शक्तिशाली भक्तिगीत ‘जब सुबह की आरती खत्म हुई और बाबाने अश्नान किया’, के आंतरिक सार को खोलते हैं।\nजो केवल एक काव्यात्मक स्तुति जैसा प्रतीत होता है, वह उनके मार्गदर्शन में एक गहन, ध्यानमय यात्रा बन जाता है—भक्ति, समर्पण और आत्मबोध की।\nकृष्णाजी केवल शब्दों का अर्थ नहीं बताते—\nवे उन शब्दों में छिपी जीवंत सत्यता को प्रकट करते हैं।\nचाहे आपने यह भजन वर्षों से गाया हो या पहली बार सुन रहे हों,\nयह सत्संग उस भजन को एक अनुभव में बदल देगा।\nयह केवल समझने का विषय नहीं—\nबल्कि उसे अपने हृदय में बसाने, अपनी भक्ति को जाग्रत करने, और ईश्वर के और निकट आने का निमंत्रण है।\n🙏हर पंक्ति एक दर्पण बन जाए।\nहर सुर एक अंतर्मुखी कदम।\nहर अर्थ एक दर्शन बन कर प्रकट हो।\n\n#sai #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #like #comment #share#explore #fyp #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #values #youtube#zili#shraddha#saburi #newgeneration#peace #saisatcharitra#young #corespirituality #saileelarahasya#viral#krishnaji #saiamrutwani #saiamritvachan #saileelarahasya …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "10,062 views",
    "Likes": "466"
  },
  {
    "Title": "स्वयं साई वाणी ... स्वर्ग किसे कहते है ? Swarg and nark",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IkKxPweXA_8",
    "Transcript": "This not an ordinary book but an enlighten heritage, His biography in His own words. Om Sairam, Millions of salutations to all Sai devotees. Last time on the occasion of Guruparnima, we learnt in detail about the seven gurus mentioned in Guru Gita. The topic of today's satsang is, As per Baba's saying, what is heaven. Because we have many beliefs about heaven and hell, many things have been said in the scriptures. But we try to know what Baba himself says about heaven and hell. Generally, the belief is that if our deeds are bad, then we are put in hell. We have to bear the tortures of the world in hell and if our deeds are pure, holy, prescribed, those deeds which have been called very holy in the scriptures, if we do those deeds, then we become entitled to heaven and in that heaven we do not have any kind of trouble and even death cannot touch us, such is the belief, that is why the whole world keeps on saying heaven is heaven but how much of that belief is true and how much is false, let us try to know through the words of Baba himself, through the Sai Satcharitra 37 Chapter Verse 10-15 'kiti ek swargsaukhya zagadati, vaniti atyantya swarga chi mahati, te bhuloka tuch maniti, marnachi bhiti mhanti ithe' How many people are there who fight for the happiness of heaven, work hard day and night and describe the greatness of heaven and those people who describe the greatness of heaven say that this earth in comparison to that heaven is worthless and it is said that here the fear of death always haunts man, so this is incomplete, and futher says 'pari avyaktatuni akara yeti, tiyeschi mhanti vyakt sthiti, pudhe tich praveshta avyakti, mrutyu mhanti tiyes' Baba has told a very deep thing here. You say there is fear of death, What in reality in death ? When the soul was not poured in the body, when it was in the unmanifested state, at that time it became manifest from the unmanifested state and came in front of the world in the body, but before taking the body it was in the unmanifested state. Understand with an example, when we go to sleep every night, when we are in deep sleep, where we do not even have the sense of being, that is called unmanifested deep sleep, which is called sushupti, so that stepping in unmanifested is a sort of temporary death but as soon as we become awake in the morning, we again come back to this body, in the consciousness, in the senses, everything becomes alert and sits up, so in the same way Baba is saying that this is also death, even if the body dies, one goes into the unmanifested state and back according to your own karmas, according to your own desires, you again take a new body and are again put in a womb. And after enduring this womb torments, after nine months, you again come to this world and start enjoying the world. So, just like every night in deep sleep, you attain death and then after dawn, you are alive again, similar is the state of death. You leave this body when you attain death, enter the unmanifest and take a new birth again according to your own desires. So, that is why Baba is telling that there is no such thing as death and if the body that has come from the unmanifested, after enjoying its pleasures, when its enjoyment is over completely, then it again attains death, 'adharm, agyan, raag, dvesha, itydi he mrityu pash and this death which defeats a human being in every birth, what is the reason for that? Why does that death dominate us? Why do we become prey to death? Why do we become morsel of death? There is unrighteousness within us, there is ignorance within us, there is attachment within us, there is hatred within us and all these are the noose of death and these become the noose of death around our neck and drag us into the mouth of death. 'yanche ulanghan kari jo ashesh, tyasich pravesh swarloki' Those who defeat these four things, conquer these four things, only those people enter the heaven. Well also these four which have been said, unrighteousness, ignorance, attachment and hatred, attachment and hatred were called by Baba Teli Tamboli. I have told this many times Attachment means to worship Baba while having attachment to the world, Baba used to call them (teli) clingy devotees. I am not dear to them. They want something from me. That is why they chant BABA BABA, and if Baba scolded someone by showing their ignorance, then those who hated Baba, Baba used to call them Tambuli and that is hatred, so all these things, this attachment and hatred do not fall, until unrighteousness does not fall, until ignorance does not fall, we will not get freedom from the fear of death, then the fear of death will always hover over our head, 'Swarg swarg toh kai anik, vairaj tochi swarg lok, virat atma swarup dekh, manasdukh vivarjit' so Baba is giving the definition of heaven here now, he says that heaven which you call, in reality, if detachment takes birth inside a human being, that detachment or dispassion in nothing but Heaven according to Baba where the attachment to the world falls, where the body consciousness falls, all the hopes, desires, wishes are completely abandoned and remember The fear which torments a man, torments him only because of desires. If there are no desires left in a man, then fear of death will be diminished so, more the desires more will be the fear of death the more ones desires, attachments, longings, cravings will reduce, more the fear of death will vanish from his life. So Baba says, moment the feeling of detachment awakens in you, you are in heaven. He is clarifying further that what is actually called heaven and goes on to say,'virat atma swaroop dekh, manas dukhvivarjit' this vastness of the whole universe is me, this whole cosmic expansion of my soul is me, I have covered this whole universe in the form of soul, one who has realized it and one who is free from mental sorrows and one who has attained the supreme soul, I am the soul of this whole universe, I am residing in every particle, one who has attained such state of knowledge, only that is heaven, as per Baba means Baba is clearly calling the knowledge of the soul as heaven here, and if a person has attained the supreme renunciation, Only he has known the real heaven, because without renunciation, the knowledge of the supreme soul is not possible, so Detachment is the basic need of a human being for self knowledge, so adoption of detachment in heart, unfolds the knowledge of self 'jethe nahi rog adi nimit, nahi chinta vyadhi dukh' - Once you know yourself then there is no cause for disease, no worry, no sorrow, no diseases as well, as sorrow is for the body, not for the soul. So where someone's body consciousness has died, if i am body this feeling has been destroyed, then all these things which are telling about disease, worry, illness, sorrow, cannot touch the soul, and where neither hunger is felt, nor thirst arises, neither there is a need to eat food, nor to drink water, because it has nothing to do with anything being made up of the five elements, because hunger and thirst have been destroyed forever and the person who is enjoying the eternal contentment, which is called permanent contentment, which is called permanent bliss, the person who is enjoying that bliss, is not troubled by this ordinary hunger and thirst, he will never get old, meaning all these symptoms of the body is hell Disease, sorrow, humiliation, pain, accidents, death, all these are related to the body and every moment one is getting old. All this is related to the body. It has no connection with the soul. Therefore, this body consciousness itself is the ultimate hell. because this body consciousness itself creates all these things. It first makes one do work that is worth not doing, and then as a result, it forces one to suffer the consequences of those deeds. The same is called body intellect, Maya, Avyakt. 'jethe nahi mrityu bhay, nahi vidhi nished dvay' - The fear of death ends forever after entering the soul form, because I am a soul that will not perish is experienced. The soul can never die. and where the matter of prescribed and non prescribed deeds is ended is the experience of Self realization Therefore, one has gone beyond both, has risen above the web of prescribed and unprescribed deeds, pure deeds and impure deeds, 'nahi vidhi nished dvaya, deh vavre atyant nirbhay' - as body conciousness has died, Vidhi - Nishid has fallen, he has risen above birth, illness and diseases, therefore by becoming fearless, as long as he is in the body, he has attained fearlessness and when the body perishes, even then he attains the supreme fearless state, and He says that that is the divine state of heaven, so they have told what heaven is, they have also told what hell is, but they are stressing too much on renunciation, if you attain renunciation, only then will you be able to experience heaven, without attaining renunciation you cannot even imagine heaven, today whatever imagination of heaven that you have in your mind, is just a figment of your imagination Baba has clarified this in these five verses and further back in this chapter again from verse number 21, he tells about heaven, 'keval vishay bhoga che stan, n lage amha te swarg bhavan, jethe n govid namasmaran, kai karan tayache' a place where only subject of senses or sensual pleasures are enjoyed we don't want such heaven and where one doesn't experiences the joy of chanting the name of Govind we don't want such inferior heaven 'keval vishay bhoga che stan' is said now we try to understand heaven by coming to the ground level, heaven is not some geographical state that after death there is such a world of heaven where we get entry and then we become residents of that place, this imagination, please drop it. And there is no such thing as hell, if there is heaven, it is here, if there is hell, it is here because as soon as a good thought comes to my mind, a pure thought, a selfless thought, a mere thought, I am not talking about actions right now, just by having a thought, our heart, our mind, our entire consciousness blossoms with a good thought, a selfless thought is heaven and if a bad thought comes in our mind or we commit a wrong deed then after committing that wrong deed the state of our mind becomes so gloomy, fear, restlessness, anxiety of every kind because that bad deed has been committed by us, we fear someone may see it, we fear someone may know about it, then that mental state in reality is hell, if we understand these things very minutely then here is the heaven, here is the hell, a good thought makes us experience the state of heaven and a bad thought, a bad deed fills our consciousness with the experience of what is hell, at that very moment we experience hell and heaven we just need that much awareness that we can feel that heaven and that hell. One good thought and action takes you momentarily to heaven one evil thought takes you to hell This is one aspect of heaven and hell. And now see the other aspect, how heaven exists in this universe, in this very world. For example, who are the role models in front of us today? Film stars, very big politicians, very big sports persons, and nowadays, I will add one more name, that is, the famous storytellers, who have amassed wealth worth crores, live a very luxurious life, live a very comfortable life, live a very high class life, their property, their bungalow, their car. Nowadays, storytellers as well are seen in a way that people will say they experience heaven. how did these people reach there? First of all, they have struggled a lot for it, have worked very hard. One has to accept this that they have worked very hard, have been very focused. Those people have put in their whole heart and soul in the field and then they have reached that stage, they have not reached there just like that, so after working so hard they have become worthy of enjoying these materialistic lifestyles if seen in one way it can also be called heaven and it is 100%, we will call it heavenly because the lifestyle that those people are living, the money that they have made, the high class lifestyle that they are living, the pleasures that they are experiencing, the pleasures that they are enjoying, a simple person cannot even imagine it, But it has a biggest flaw that it has no protection of God They are not living or dying to get God, There is no detachment, no conscience of right and wrong, no purity of mind, and there is absolutely no experience of the soul. That is why even after experiencing so much wealth, so much name, so much fame, so much splendor, they are impoverished So such heavenly state is so empty in the eyes of Sadguru, because there is no conscience, there is no support of Sadguru, it is not that they are living and dying to attain God. If they believe in God even a little bit, then it's just for the world or heaven of theirs should sustain and flourish, that is why we take refuge in God, take refuge in Guru, but they are not living or dying to attain Guru, in spite of having everything they are destitute we get very affected, get influenced by seeing them, but those people are really living a heavenly life in a way, but still it is a poor life. On this there is a very famous couplet of Kabir ji, 'bada hua to kya hua, jaise ped khajur, panthi ko chaya nahi, faal lage ati dur' so what does it matter if someone is rich. The date palm tree is very tall and that tree is so tall that if a person is troubled in the hot sun and wants to take a little shade, then the shadow of the tree is so lengthened that he cannot go under the tree and get that shade and If it is your sentiment to atleast have a fruit then the fruits are hung at such a height that a man cannot easily climb and pluck them and eat them, so similarly these people who are enjoying the materialistic heaven are living their life only to enjoy the pleasures of the world, but a saint, all his property belongs to the world, this is the difference between a saint and a celebrity, but I am talking about a true saint; nowadays there are a lot of fake saints; now they too have become celebrities, this is a different matter; let me make that clear as well; there is a huge difference between an original saint and a duplicate saint; if he is original then he gives up everything for the world, for the society, for the devotees; he does not keep anything with him, so this is the difference between a celebrity and a true saint; a person who has worldly fame, money, name and is enjoying worldly pleasures, in spite of that if in his life Bhakti, Gjyan, Vairajya is absent then he is experiencing fake heaven because Baba has told in three-four verses what original heaven is. one who has been freed from mental sorrow, one who has experienced the all pervading soul, and one who has attained the renunciation, whose all desires, lusts have fallen, and experiencing godly bliss is enjoying real heaven Not these celebrities. Baba has defined heaven in a very wonderful way whether you go to heaven, or you go to hell, the sensual pleasures are the same. They enjoy only five subjects of senses, even after reaching that height, just they enjoy it at a very high level, and the one who does not have that much money, that much power, he enjoys those pleasures at a very small level, however only sensual pleasure are enjoyed what Baba is telling. with an example Baba says, 'The senses that Indra enjoys in heaven, the same senses are enjoyed by donkey.' so Baba has called Indra a donkey. the enjoyment of both is the same because both have the desire to enjoy the senses, the only difference is that Indra or big people enjoy at a very high level and a donkey or low people enjoy at small level but both are living in Hell because attachment of both are not vanished, they are living by the attachment of the five senses, sound, touch, form, taste, smell, these five senses are the means for enjoyment, so the human being wants to enjoy them, so Baba is saying that both are one, Indra who enjoys heaven in Nandanvan, whereas the donkey, enjoys heaven in mud because there is dearth of renunciation in their lives and as both are indulged in sensual pleasures so both are one the only difference is that he is enjoying it at a higher level, he is a big celebrity, a sportsperson, a very famous person, some industrialist, very important, so he enjoys the pleasures at that high level and lowly people enjoys pleasures at low level the pleasure of both if seen, then the pleasure of both is the same, there is no difference between the two, he says further. verse number 24 - 'jethuni punya shaye patan, kinimit tadarth yatn' - where after completion of merits, one has meant to fall from state see, those who are enjoying that high state, they have made a bank balance of their good deeds and today that is why they are healthy, that is why they are capable of enjoying all kinds of pleasures, that is why they are getting so much name, fame, money, everything, they have made that much bank balance, but now understand when they are enjoying money, name, fame, everything, then they are spending by taking out from the bank balance, so the day the bank balance will get over by enjoying the pleasures, they will slip and fall from there in such a way that they will not even know where thay have reached People who are enjoying their lives at such heights will not know where they will be reborn so this is spiritual depth. For example, assume is a very big actor. Today, he has acquired such mastery in the field of acting that the whole world looks at him with high respect. Now, after reaching such a high level of acting, that person enjoyed that much stardom. He enjoyed it. He enjoyed the name, fame, money, everything. And while spending, his good deeds kept on depleting Because, all the hard work he had done to earn those good deeds, now, by enjoying it, he enjoyed the name, he kept spending it. He enjoyed the fame. He kept spending it. Eventually it becomes null. now he falls from there, he comes back as a simple person in the next birth, now that same person will watch his own movies and applaud his acting unaware. This is maya now in this birth he has come in such a neutral state that now he does not remember anything of the previous birth because he has finished enjoying it, that same one will praise his own acting, life and lavishness then it is said that after enjoying the virtue, after enjoying its comforts, after enjoying its happiness, after enjoying its luxuries, the virtue ends then automatically one comes back to a simple life unaware about his previous birth completely and Baba says that if despite reaching such a state of virtue to such a height and after enjoying it, if it ends again, if it brings you to a very lower state then why do we need such a heaven, why do we need such a successful life, if its result is that after enjoying it, if again one comes back to a simple life and gets trapped in it If you have to get down again and start again then why do you need it, why do you desire it then He say, 'kin nimit tadart yatna, tyahunni barve yatil janan, mahatve gahan bhulok. So this simple life is better than that and its greatness is many times more than Swargalok (rich life) and one thing is clear that while enjoying heaven our merits get wasted, whatever merits we have earned, the more we will enjoy it, the more we will encash it, the more that bank balance will become nil and will get finished becoming zero and then we will be brought back and thrown down again, so merits are destroyed in heaven and sins are destroyed in hell, if for some reason a man has to suffer torments of hell, then his sins get destroyed there, so this is a depth about heaven and hell, please inculcate it in your heart very well such an imagination that the age span of a man is very long in heaven, what can be the comparison of Brahmloka with any person on Earth even though he lives there for maximum seventy years to hundred years but while living on Earth if he seeks the supreme soul, realises Brahma, then in comparison to that this is heaven like condition is nothing it is just a disgust as Baba is telling this in the 25th verse although a human being lives for a very short time, but if he, with the mindset of surrendering to God, does selfless action even for a moment if he does selfless action, he attains the fearless state to increase one's inclination towards selfless Karmayoga, Baba is saying such a big thing that if even for a second the feeling of doing action with selfless feeling awakens in your mind and if you surrender that action to God, that first of all it will be selfless action and that too we will surrender that action to the Supreme Soul, if you fulfil these two things, then you will attain fearless state in comparison to your heaven, he is telling that where Bhagwat devotees do not reside, where there is no awakening for the devotees of God, they would be sitting on high pedestals just to enjoy special pleasures, those people do not have exclusive devotion of God in their lives, then what use is such place to us? and where there is no narration of Guru's story in that heaven, then what should we do with that heaven? and of what use is that place where no songs or dance or worship towards God is implemented? on this I remember a couplet of Kabir ji. He says, 'ram bulava bhejiya diya kabira roye jo sukh sadhu sang me so vaikunth na hoye' so this fits perfect to the ovi, so Kabhira Ji is saying that hey Kabir, you have lived such a high life that Ram Ji is saying that I have booked a seat for you here in heaven, so you come and take your seat, so Kabira says no Ram Ji, I don't want your heaven, and Kabhira is crying that no, I don't want to come to your Vaikunt, as The happiness that i have in company of sadhus, the namasmaran that I will do in the company of sadbhakts, the stories of God that I will narrate or listen to, i will be deprived of that in your Vaikunt, Ramji; no, I have no concern with your Vaikunt, and the same thing here Baba has delivered means so much importance has been given to the company of a sadhu and sant that in front of it Heaven and vaikuth too is inferior one more verse, 'bramhatmaiektva vidnyan, aatyantik nihshrsyas sadhan, 'te to ya swargahuni gahan, bhu lok he nav tayache' and he says, 'the science that the soul itself is the supreme god, one who likes it that this soul itself is Shiva, that soul itself is the supreme god, whoever likes this science, here, it is believed that the birth we got is to attain that perfection, this body is the only means of attaining perfection and for this body, earth is the supreme world and it is more important than heaven. Now see, the earth has been declared greater than heaven. Now let us try to understand this thing properly. Now understand that you have worked very hard to enjoy this world, for the success of this mortal world and you have achieved that as well. Now you are enjoying it. When you are enjoying that thing, there is no place for the devotion of God, there is no hope there because you are so engrossed in sensual pleasures that it is impossible for you to turn towards exclusive devotion. So that is why heaven is dangerous and in the same way hell is also dangerous. Well hell means what if you do some deed that you should not do and the body has become so disabled due to big diseases. caught in a trap, went bankrupt, caught in all kinds of troubles, every moment being with the fear of death, all this is haunting, so even such a hell is dangerous because even there, remembering God, meditating on God, worshipping God, exclusive devotion to God is not possible, which means when you enjoy the worldly pleasures at a very higher level in a very wonderful way in the world, even there exclusive devotion to God is not possible, and if due to some reason you have to suffer extreme pain, have to be bedridden, have to go through a lot of trouble, that is hell, then even at that time exclusive devotion to God, worship of God, remembering God is not possible, hence both these sides heaven as well as hell are dangerous, hence it is said here that the place of the earth is useful and earth means the place where lord has kept me neither you have given me the prosperity nor you have kept in intense agony and it's your immense compassion lord that you have kept me grounded That is why I am able to think about you, I am able to remember you, my inclination is increasing towards your exclusive devotion, so O Lord, never show me that heaven, nor show me that hell, just give me a little peace and a little pain, but while enduring both of them I should be able to reach your real form, so don't put me in so much pain that I stop remembering you, and fill me with so much in happiness that I get confused and get entangled in its attractions and forget you. It means that there is a high possibility of extreme happiness to trap a person in attachments and extreme pain and suffering disturbs you so much that you are not able to remember God, so that is why here in this verse, he has said that do not give me complete heaven there, nor keep me trapped in complete hell, master, keep me always on earth so that I can always think about you, chant your name, meditate, worship, selfless service, power, knowledge, detachment and i can live your or merge myself in your blissful and universal form always keep me on earth, do not show me heaven, do not show me hell, keep me on earth, it is a very good verse, but it has to be understood properly in this perspective, that is why, every moment, thank Baba a million times that master, you have not given me any disease. It is your mercy, you have not placed me to higher pedestal, it is your mercy, and both the things that you have done to me, that is why I am able to worship you today, if you had given me unlimited happiness, even then I would have gone astray, and if you had given me unlimited pain, even then I would have gone astray, O Lord, you have kept me on this earth, keep me like this till my last breath, so that after worshipping you, I can merge in you. So this is what the verse is saying. Further, in verse number 29 Baba says, 'Kaaya Vachha Mane Karun, Kara Panch Praan Samarpan, Nishchayatmak Buddhi Hi Lean, Ho Vo Gurudhin Sarvaswi' this verse is repeated again, the same verse is mentioned in chapter 16 in which Baba asks Marwari for five rupees, so these are the five things, Kaaya(body), Vachha(speech), Mann(Mind), Panch Praan(five vital airs) and Buddhi(intellect). we will be able to give these five rupees only if He keeps us on the earth, neither by keeping us in heaven will we be able to offer these to Him, nor in hell because the pain there is so much that remembering God is impossible there. Therefore, thank you again and again that the Lord has placed us on earth/situation where it is easy to worship Him, extreme state of happiness as well as extreme state of sorrow is also dangerous, Brahmagyan in just five rupees on this topic is video on our channel in detail. You can watch it there. It has been explained in great detail in that, If one takes refuge in God by offering five rupees to Him, then how will one be afraid of the fears of this world, how will one be worried about the meaningless world of Maya as it never stands tall after offering five rupees to Sadguru After destroying all your ignorance, Sadguru will take you to refuge. However, for that to happen, a person's residence should be on earth, as stated in verse 28. and it's Baba's infinite compassion that He has kept us grounded or else you wouldn't have any desire to listen to this talk If you have been given immense happiness by the Lord, then you must have been trapped in illusion. And you would be deprived of this wisdom on the other hand if He has given you immense pain then too this wisdom wouldn't have impacted your Heart So, it's His compassion that He has kept us grounded and we could worship Him exclusively To explain this heaven and hell, I will take a story and it will become more clear, there was a king and a city he ruled. He had two sons the Kulguru of the empire was such a guru who had attained great spiritual progress, the Kulguru gives education to both the children, gives training in spirituality, ruling is an inheritance from the father. So those kids will rule sooner or later but the Kulguru feels that they should also be given spiritual knowledge, so both of them are filled with deep spiritual knowledge but one of the boys, the elder one, is not inclined towards spirituality. He stays connected with him only with the feeling of taking care of the royal throne and the younger one listens to his words with full attention and he lives each and every word, and those experiences start coming in his life, so one day without telling anyone, that younger boy leaves the house, and starts doing penance for years, yearns to seek refuge in gurus, great gurus come in his life, and achieves enlightenment from them following the spiritual path and the elder becomes king after the death of his father and achieves a big empire to rule one day it is known in the royal court that a yogi has come and is sitting on the outskirts of a village, on the banks of a river, and whatever he says, it gets accomplished, then this news reaches the king as well, and then the king feels that if such a great yogi has come to our kingdom then we should definitely bring him to honor so the ministers go and try to welcome the Yogi to the royal court but the yogi denies saying i am fine here and close discussion the ministers recognize that the yogi is none but the younger prince so they go and tell the elder one about the yogis as his younger brother. He feel sorry for desolate condition of his younger brother So with some ministers he on his chariot goes to bring his brother back so, he says to his younger brother, \"You came and sat here like this, came to their own kingdom, don't feel like coming?\" The younger replied,\" No, I can see you for 24 hours\" Where am I far from you that I can see you? I see you every moment. They say, whatever it is, let's go with us to the kingdom. I won't come to the kingdom. Then there is a bit of an argument between the two of them about what state you have gotten yourself into. Why are you in such a wretched condition here? Now that I have found out today, I can't leave you here. I will take you with me. What state have you brought yourself into? What have you achieved? Look, I have become a king here. Today, people follow me wherever I go My name and fame are widespread. What do you have? What have you gained? What state have you brought yourself into? He say that all these people run after you. If I ask someone to give up their life for me, they will do it. The big brother says this. The little brother was weaving a blanket and has a needle. so he throws the needle into the sea and he says, tell your people to search and bring back the needle. What's the big deal about that? Then the big brother says, He orders his people togo and jump into the river. One by one the divers dive but they can't find the needle. Finally, the big brother also jumps into the water and searches for the needle but doesn't find it. He feels defeated and asks the younger one to bring it? So, the little brother says that it will come. \"How can it come? Go and jump into the river for it\" asks the elder. 'No i don't have to jump it will come at your feet' says the yonger. So, the little brother sits with closed eyes, focusing intently. A fish comes out of the water holding the needle in its mouth and drops it in front of them before jumping back into the river. The big brother is astonished, thinking that your influence is everywhere. Today I have realized that your life is very high and the life I considered high has been proven hollow today. Saying this, he bows before him. The purpose of telling this story is that the big brother was experiencing heaven, while the little brother, by remaining on the ground, has reached such a high state through his spiritual practice that he has conquered the entire universe. Whatever he desires, the nature or the universe becomes his servant. As soon as he speaks or even thinks of something, nature has to fulfill it. The little brother has reached this state, becoming the hero of the universe, the yogi. The big brother, on the other hand, is like Indra in Nandanvana, enjoying heavenly pleasures compared to donkey who experiences it in grabage heap.He realizes that the happiness he is experiencing today is nothing in comparison to his brother's accomplishments. If this topic has come up, let's take another topic related to Islam. If you have been active on social media, you might have seen the ongoing debate about the mention of paradise (Jannah) and 72 virgins (hūr) in the Quran. It is said that if a man has faith in God, worships Him with full dedication, and devotes himself entirely to God, he will be granted paradise, where he will receive 72 virgins. This topic has stirred quite a controversy, which many of you might have noticed. Since this is related to heaven, I thought we should shed some light on this topic today. Especially, women often ask, \"Does this mean that only men will attain paradise and receive 72 virgins? What about women?\" They wonder if the Quran mentions anything for women, or if it is only for men. Many questions have been raised, sometimes in a very negative way, and have been presented incorrectly. The answers given by people are also available, but today, since this topic is related to heaven, and we have discussed it extensively, let’s look at what the Quran says first. According to the Quran, one must follow the footsteps of Prophet Muhammad. The guidance he has given must be followed completely. By doing so, the heart will be purified, all wrong desires of the self will be eliminated, and the self will become pure. First and foremost, one must follow the footsteps of the Prophet, This will lead to the purification of the mind And if the self (nafs) is purified, then paradise will be granted, and there he will receive 72 virgins (hūr), normally this is the perception. let's assume that we adhered the advice of prophet muhammad, acted accordingly and mind is purified and if had a vision of God So I ask a question: Is paradise greater than seeing God (Allah) and the Prophet Muhammad? I want to ask this first. If it is greater than both of these, then indeed, paradise will be granted, and 72 virgins will come. But someone who believes that if I receive even the dust from the feet of my guide, the Prophet Muhammad, then my life will be purified, such a person will not think about paradise or the 72 virgins. The truth is, once a person follows their advice and sees God, will the desire for paradise and 72 virgins even remain? we don't live with such common sense that how can a desire for paradise or virgins would remain after having the vision of God It was perhaps kept there so that initially, people would be drawn towards faith. Maybe that temptation was shown for that reason, but there is nothing greater than that. the problem is that our thinking doesn't goes above paradise and virgins towards Prophet and God Their status is much higher than paradise and the 72 virgins because once one attains God, those desires will cease to exist. Neither the desire for paradise nor the desire for virgins will remain. These promises were perhaps made to initially attract people towards faith. There is nothing greater than this. As I mentioned, paradise and hell are within us. A good thought, a good action creates paradise within us, and a bad thought, a bad action creates hell within us at that moment. So, paradise and hell, heaven and hell, are within us, not outside. That’s all I will say. If we embark on the worship of God Living and dying for His worship then No matter how many difficulties come that person endures with great patience and does not stop until he sees Allah. In reality, moving forward while enduring those hardships is true heaven. and If there is no connection with the Prophet Muhammad or the desire to see Allah, and one is only indulging in the comforts of the world, then there is no greater hell than that. So, we must see heaven and hell from a very different perspective. If that clarity comes, then perhaps all these questions will not arise. Otherwise, as long as humanity remains on this earth, these questions will continue to trouble us. These are some of the things that Baba mentioned about heaven in Chapter 37 of the Sai Satcharitra. I have tried to open this up to you today. I hope it has touched your heart and brought some clarity about what heaven and hell truly are. So, I will conclude today's session here. If anyone has any questions on this subject, please feel free to ask.",
    "Description": "💐 Om Sai Ram 💐\n🌞 Swayam Sai Vani brings you a deep spiritual discussion answering some profound questions:\n1️⃣ What is death, and what are the reasons that lead us closer to it?\n2️⃣ What is the fundamental difference between the real (spiritual) heaven and the imaginary (worldly) heaven?\n3️⃣ According to the Sadguru, what do heaven and hell truly mean?\n4️⃣ The heaven that we seek and desire—does Baba also want us to attain that heaven?\n5️⃣ What is the truth behind the mention of ‘Jannat and the 72 virgins’ in the Quran Sharif?\nJoin Krishna Ji as he explains these topics in depth, providing clarity and spiritual wisdom to help us understand the true meaning of heaven, death, and liberation.\n🙏 Watch, reflect, and elevate your spiritual journey with Swayam Sai Vani.\nOm Sai Ram! 🙏\n\n💐 ओम साईं राम 💐\n🌞 स्वयं साई वाणी प्रस्तुत करता है एक गहन आध्यात्मिक चर्चा, जिसमें जीवन, मृत्यु और परलोक से जुड़े कुछ महत्वपूर्ण प्रश्नों के उत्तर दिए गए हैं:\n1️⃣ मृत्यु आखिर क्या है और कौन-सी बातें हमें मृत्यु के करीब ले जाती हैं?\n2️⃣ वास्तविक (आध्यात्मिक) स्वर्ग और काल्पनिक (संसारी) स्वर्ग में क्या मूलभूत अंतर है?\n3️⃣ सद्गुरु की दृष्टि में स्वर्ग और नर्क का असली अर्थ क्या है?\n4️⃣ जिसे हम स्वर्ग मानते हैं और जिसे पाने की इच्छा रखते हैं — क्या बाबा भी चाहते हैं कि हमें वह स्वर्ग मिले?\n5️⃣ कुरान शरीफ में ‘जन्नत और उसमें मिलने वाली 72 हूरों’ का ज़िक्र कितना सत्य है?\nकृष्णा जी से जानिए इन सवालों के गहन और सरल जवाब, जो आपकी आध्यात्मिक समझ को नई ऊँचाइयों पर ले जाएंगे।\n🙏 देखें, समझें और स्वयं साई वाणी के साथ अपने आध्यात्मिक सफर को समृद्ध करें।\nओम साईं राम! 🙏\n\n#OmSaiRam\n#SaiBaba\n#Spirituality\n#Sadguru\n#HeavenAndHell\n#SaiSatcharitra\n#LifeAndDeath\n#SpiritualWisdom\n#KrishnaJi\n#DivineKnowledge\n#SaiVani\n#GuruTeachings\n#SoulJourney\n#JannatTruth\n#MysticalTalk\n\n\n1️⃣ Introduction: Understanding Death and Its Causes\n2️⃣ Real Heaven vs. Imaginary Heaven: The Fundamental Difference\n3️⃣ Sadguru’s Perspective on Heaven and Hell\n4️⃣ Does Baba Wish for Us to Attain the Heaven We Seek?\n5️⃣ The Truth Behind Jannat and the 72 Virgins in the Quran Sharif\n6️⃣ Conclusion: Spiritual Insights for Liberation …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, krishnaji on saibaba",
    "Views": "8,455 views",
    "Likes": "406"
  },
  {
    "Title": "क्या साईबाबा मांस खाते थे और खिलाते थे ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fmnXsMt2AHA",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "बाबा सच में मांस खाते और दूसरों को खिलाते थे क्या? 🍗इस वीडियो में हम जानेंगे:1️⃣ ऐसी कौन सी दिव्य अवस्था होती है जहाँ मांसाहार वर्जित नहीं माना जाता? एक परम...",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, krishnaji on saibaba",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "गुरु पौर्णिमा विशेष - 7 प्रकार के गुरु",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-sGaWGzwtAE",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "🌕 गुरु पूर्णिमा विशेष | ७ प्रकार के गुरु | गुरु गीता का दिव्य ज्ञान“ओम् साईं राम 🙏”📿 “ध्यानमूलं गुरोर्मूर्तिः, पूजामूलं गुरोः पदम्।मंत्रमूलं गुरोर्वाक्यं,...",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, krishnaji on saibaba",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "४ मुक्ती की गहराई",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PMVpws4_tI4",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "४ मुक्ती की गहराई🔴https://youtu.be/YQayimAT3do🔴https://youtu.be/cNFwPvZ5spw🌟 चार प्रकार की मुक्ति का रहस्य | सायुज्य की ओर यात्रा(Salokya, Samipya, Sarupy...",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, krishnaji on saibaba, mm",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "क्या है ? - कर्मयोग भक्तीयोग ज्ञानयोग ध्यानयोग",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K3MThehg5nI&pp=0gcJCSMKAYcqIYzv",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "📖 श्री साईं सच्चरित्र | योग क्या है? — चारों मार्गों का गूढ़ रहस्य(Karma Yoga | Bhakti Yoga | Gyan Yoga | Dhyan Yoga)एक अद्भुत आध्यात्मिक चर्चा — जहाँ कर्म ...",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, krishnaji on saibaba",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई के 11 वचन ( पहली बार सही रोशनी मे )",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y3dkutn74PA",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "साई के 11 वचन ( पहली बार सही रोशनी मे )*ॐ साईराम*अब *हर शनिवार* रात 8:45 PM बजे Zoom App पर कृष्णाजी का सत्संग होनेवाला है । इसे join करने के लिये निचे दिये ...",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, krishnaji on saibaba, sai ke 11 vachan, saibaba ke gyara vachan, 11 vachan sai ke, saibaba ke bol, saisatcharitra, saibaba ka janamsthan",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "चार युग ( साई की रोशनी में )",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uurqq2IFG20",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "चार युग( साई की रोशनी में )Krishnajis satsang live on zoom*ॐ साईराम*अब *हर शनिवार* रात 8:45 PM बजे Zoom App पर कृष्णाजी का सत्संग होनेवाला है । इसे join करने...",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, krishnaji on saibaba",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "नवविधा भक्ती ना सही केवल, साई साई का रटन सही",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y3WELgIf0Gk&pp=0gcJCSMKAYcqIYzv",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "नवविधा भक्ती ना सही केवल, साई साई का रटन सही*ॐ साईराम*अब *हर शनिवार* रात 8:45 PM बजे Zoom App पर कृष्णाजी का सत्संग होनेवाला है । इसे join करने के लिये निचे ...",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "श्रवण - मनन - निदिध्यासन",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0yjXKdXE8Yo",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "श्रवण - मनन - निदिध्यासन  (Zoom Meeting Satsang - 29 June, 2024)*ॐ साईराम*अब *हर शनिवार* रात 8:45 PM बजे Zoom App पर कृष्णाजी का सत्संग होनेवाला है । इसे joi...",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Jawar Alli and Saibaba's guru? - (The right skill to lay)",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dsao2V2xYJI",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "✨Shri Sai Satcharitra Adhyay 5 (Ovi 158 )✨Jawahar Ali Episode— Was he actually Sai Baba's Guru?Or did this experience teach a profound spiritual lesson about...",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साईवाणी - छिलका मेरा फल तुम्हारा",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yzaJehHa1XI",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "🍌 श्री साईं सच्चरित्र में केले की लीला | गुरु की अनंत करुणा का संदेश 🙏इस वीडियो में श्री कृष्णा जी ने श्री साईं सच्चरित्र के अध्याय 12 के ओवी 95 के माध्यम ...",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "शिरडी धाम यात्रा और कृष्णाजी का सत्संग 19, 20, 21 जून 2024 काशी अन्नपूर्णा सत्रम, शिरडी",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SV6XfloPE8E",
    "Transcript": "O Mind-Enchanting One, Remover of Curses and Suffering, Destroyer of Ignorance, Bestower of Liberation, The Supreme Giver of Auspiciousness, Embodiment of Truth, Consciousness, and Bliss, the Sacred Mother of countless embodiments of Sai. the True Form of Sai Himself Victory to the Divine Scripture: Shri Sai Satcharita.",
    "Description": "शिरडी धाम यात्रा और कृष्णाजी का सत्संग 19, 20, 21 जून 2024 काशी अन्नपूर्णा सत्रम, शिरडी …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar",
    "Views": "1,099 views",
    "Likes": "115"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई बाबा तेली तांबोलीयो से हमेशा क्यो नाराज रहते थे ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zJoTfHKZTQs&pp=0gcJCSMKAYcqIYzv",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "0:00 Introduction 2:33 तेली कौन है? सकाम भक्त3:09 तांबोली कौन है ? द्वेषपूर्ण भक्त4:44 लीला का सारयह वीडियो साईं बाबा की एक गहरी कथा को उजागर करता है, जिसमें...",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "महिमा सद्भक्त के सहवास का",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jx7c5eHPIW0",
    "Transcript": "so Baba through this leela wants to say that worth of company an ardent devotee Om Sai Ram. In Adhyay 22 of Sai Satcharitra is the story of Ahmednagar resident Shri Kaka Saheb Mirikar’s son Shri Balasaheb Mirikar’s serious danger to life. The story goes like this. Balasaheb Mirikar who was a Mamalatdar of Kopergaon, one day set out to Chitli on official government work. On the way he came to Shirdi to take Baba’s darshan. Whilst talking Baba asked Balasaheb if he was aware of Lambu Maharaja that is poisonous snake and the effects of its poison. Everyone present there started wondering why Baba asked this. But since it was getting late to reach Chitli, after taking darshan Balasaheb left from there without asking anything further. Baba asked Madhavrao to go with Mirikar. Mirikar asked Madhavrao what will you do by coming so far to Chitli. Unnecessarily you will be troubled. Madhavrao went to Baba and told him this. Baba said Okay, Allah’s wish. But Mirikar thought that Baba will not say anything without reason. So, he signaled to Madhavrao to go along with him. But Madhavrao again took Baba’s permission and went to Chitli with Mirikar. When they reached Chitli arrangement to stay was made in Hanuman Temple. So, they both went there. But the Government official they were to meet did not come and because it was very late in night, they both rested on the blanket there and Mirikar started reading the newspaper. Then there was sound of rustling of paper. The servant present there took his lantern and saw that there was a snake sitting on Mirikar’s waist. Seeing this he got scared and softly whispered “Snake, Snake.” Mirikar’s attention went there and he knew his life was in danger. In the meantime, the servants present there killed the snake with sticks and Mirikar’s life was saved. Friends, from this story we come to know that Baba always protected his devotees from impending calamities. But in this story Baba send Madhavrao with Mirikar but Madhavrao did nothing then why did Baba send Madhavrao with him. We will throw light on this in this episode. Om Sai Ram. In this Leela Bala Saheb Mirikar has been addressed as Kaka Saheb Mirikar and we apologize for that. The Leela in Adhyay 22, kaka Saheb Mirikar. All those who were connected to Baba in the village, there was a custom there that whenever anyone from the village went out then that person took permission. This custom was followed by everyone that before leaving Baba’s permission has to be taken. Go to Dwarakamai, touch Baba’s feet, take Baba’s permission and then leave. This had become a ritual But it was not that everyone followed this custom religiously and earnestly. Some people followed it like a custom or ritual. And some followed with complete faith. There is a difference. Kaka Saheb Mirikar also comes to Baba and says that I am going to Chitli permit me to go, takes darshan and sets out to go. Shama also has come with him. So, he calls Shama and tells him that you also go with him to Chitli. He goes and tells him that Baba has asked me to go with you. I am coming with you. He says why are you unnecessarily troubling yourself, there is no need for you to come. On hearing this Shama again goes to Baba and says that he is saying that there is no need of me to go and he has asked me not to go with him. Baba says it’s okay. There is a very important verse, what Baba says to Shama – Apan Chintave nitya heet, updeshava arth vihit, asel jaise jayache karmat, taisech nischit ghadel (Verse 65 Adhyay 22). This a very important verse. When I say something to someone, I think long term and I say for their good and if they do not want to listen then whatever is in their Karma, what Baba is saying here is that as per karma some adversity has to happen and I have said something so that it can be avoided and if you do not want to follow it then let whatever is written as per Karma will happen. What is the meaning endangerment to life? It means that some adversity which should happen has been written and when that is avoided then we say that endangerment to life has been avoided. So, there is some calamity waiting to happen which is not good for Kaka Saheb but this person has no idea about it and he says that there is no need of you even then Baba says that you go. When Mirikar refuses to take him then he comes to Baba and says that he says that there is no need of me there and has refused and then Baba makes that statement. This Baba’s statement, and Mirikar is standing there and listening and before that he has even given hint that do you know that long Baba and making his hand like a snake. Do you know that deadly snake and then remembers all these things and there is depth to this and if Baba is saying then I must take him with me. He gets scared and then he understands that if Baba is saying then I must take him. Then he takes Shama with him. And as the story goes and you narrated, his staying in Maruti Temple and he is engrossed in reading the newspaper and then the hissing sound of the snake and sighting it in the lantern’s light and then people coming and killing it, this is the story. Now the question is what is Shama’s, Madhavrao’s role in this which Baba has insisted upon and send him with him. And Madhavrao has only done this, if you see his contribution then from his mouth comes a statement which is very important which is Verse 84 from the same Adhyay – Shamrao hi chakit zale, mhanati Baba he kay kele, naste vighna kotuni dhadile, ata nirasaley pahije. This statement has lot of significance. Because the whole leela opens up because of this statement. When Shamaji was looking at that time at the snake and it is said that time is inauspicious at that time and it would take life, it is poisonous snake and if it bites then Mirikar will not survive. It is that snake which if it bites won’t be able to ask for even water. After seeing that the statement that comes from Shama is Shamrao hi chakit zale, mhanati Baba he kay kele, naste vighna kotuni dhadile, ata nirasaley pahije. It means that even Shamrao was surprised and he says that Baba what have you done? This unwanted calamity where did you bring it from? Now you please take us out from this. The wording ata nirasaley pahije are invaluable. Baba knew very well that Mirikar did not have that dedicated devotion towards Baba that even in such a delicate situation he will remember Baba. Kaka Saheb Mirikar devotion did not have such depth but Shama had. This story itself shows the depth of Shama’s devotion. Firstly, when Baba asked him to go, he immediately goes and sits in Tonga and when Mirikar says that there is need to come then he goes to Baba and tells him and Baba says Okay you need not go. But when again Mirikar tells Shama no you come with me that time also he does not go directly and sit in Tonga, he says that I will go to Baba and again take his permission. That depth of obedience, means Shama never used his intelligence when Baba was there. He was absolutely obedient. Using own intelligence was like poison. He had such deep faith in Baba. His ego was surrendered. He was egoless. He was totally liberated from doership and when a person reaches that state then anything that person says then Baba has no choice but to do that is what this leela says. Mi maziya bhaktacha bhukela, ahe pasich ubha thakala, premacha mi bhukela, haak hakela detase. It means that I am always under the control of my true devotees, I am with them every moment, I am always hungry for their love, to such devotee at their one call I present myself without any delay. That is why he has not done anything but the words that come from his mouth ata nirasaley pahije, that prayer, that which he asks for that is valuable. Baba through this Leela says that even we get the company of a dedicated devotee in our life then what its value is, is what this Leela tells. That one person who has that exclusive devotion towards his Guru, I am not that devoted but even if I get the company of such a devotee then only by being in such a company the worse adversity of my life can be avoided, such a company is of importance. It is said your color is as per the company you keep. So, this leela beautifully shows what is the importance of such a person. If in life I am not totally devoted to my Sadguru then at least such a person who has this dedicated devotion then I should ask from Baba company of such a person His company, his prayers, a single word from his mouth can avoid my calamity. And Baba has no choice but to pay heed to his words. It is there in his karma; this calamity was written in Kaka Saheb Mirikar’s fortune. Baba is all capable of avoiding the calamity even without Shama. But through this story it is trying to show the significance of a true devotee. This is more important is what I would say. Company of a true devotee will surely avoid premature death of normal devotee and also gradually take away his inevitable death.",
    "Description": "🙏 Sai Baba Leela | The Divine Protection of True Devotees | Story of Shri Kaka Saheb Mirikar & Shama 🙏\nIn this inspiring video, Shri Krishna Ji narrates a profound leela from Chapter 22 of the Sai Satcharitra—the story of Shri Kaka Saheb Mirikar’s son, Shri Balasaheb Mirikar, and the divine protection bestowed by Baba through the dedicated devotee Shama.\n✨ Highlights of this video:\nThe miraculous incident where Baba warns about a deadly snake and the life-threatening danger to Balasaheb Mirikar.\nWhy Baba insisted Shama accompany Mirikar, despite initial reluctance.\nThe significance of Shama’s unwavering devotion and obedience to Baba’s commands.\nThe deeper spiritual message of the power of true devotee’s company and prayers.\nHow Baba protects His devotees from inevitable calamities through grace and devotion.\nThe importance of surrendering ego and following the Guru’s guidance with faith.\n💡 This story beautifully illustrates that even if one’s own devotion is limited, the presence and prayers of a sincere devotee can safeguard and transform lives. Baba’s leela teaches us the immense power of association with true devotees and the grace that follows.\nIf you find this video insightful, please Like 👍, Share 🔄, and Subscribe 🔔 for more spiritual wisdom and Sai Baba stories.\n#SaiBaba #SaiSatcharitra #ShirdiSai #Devotion #DivineProtection #TrueDevotee #SpiritualStories #gurugrace \n\n\n🙏 साईं बाबा लीला | सच्चे भक्त की संगति का दिव्य संरक्षण | श्री काका साहेब मिरीकर और शामा की कहानी 🙏\nइस प्रेरणादायक वीडियो में श्री कृष्णा जी साई सच्चरित्र के अध्याय 22 से एक गहन लीला का वर्णन करते हैं — श्री काका साहेब मिरीकर के पुत्र श्री बलासाहेब मिरीकर के जीवन में बाबा द्वारा दी गई दिव्य रक्षा की कथा।\n✨ इस वीडियो के मुख्य बिंदु:\nवह चमत्कारिक घटना जब बाबा ने एक जहरीले सांप और बलासाहेब की जान को खतरा होने की चेतावनी दी।\nबाबा ने क्यों शामा को मिरीकर के साथ जाने के लिए कहा, जबकि शामा पहले हिचकिचा रहे थे।\nशामा की Baba के प्रति अडिग भक्ति और आज्ञाकारिता का महत्व।\nसच्चे भक्त की संगति और प्रार्थना की आध्यात्मिक शक्ति।\nबाबा किस प्रकार अपने भक्तों को अनिष्टों से बचाते हैं और कृपा करते हैं।\nअहंकार त्यागकर गुरु की आज्ञा और विश्वास के साथ चलने का महत्व।\n💡 यह कहानी हमें सिखाती है कि यदि अपनी भक्ति सीमित भी हो, तो सच्चे भक्त की संगति और उनकी प्रार्थनाएं जीवन को सुरक्षित और सशक्त बना सकती हैं। बाबा की यह लीला सच्चे भक्तों के साथ जुड़ाव और उनके द्वारा प्राप्त कृपा की महत्ता को दर्शाती है।\nअगर यह वीडियो आपको अच्छा लगे तो कृपया लाइक करें 👍, शेयर करें 🔄 और सब्सक्राइब करें 🔔 ताकि आपको ऐसे और आध्यात्मिक वीडियो मिलते रहें।\n#साईंबाबा #साईसच्चरित्र #शिर्डीसाईं #भक्ति #दिव्यसंरक्षण #सच्चाभक्त #आध्यात्मिककहानियां #गुरुकृपा\n\n\nChapters / अध्याय\n0:00 – बाबा का भक्तों के प्रति संरक्षण: परिचय\n0:34 – साईं सच्चरित्र अध्याय 22: काका साहेब मिरीकर की कहानी\n0:57 – बलासाहेब मिरीकर का शिर्डी आगमन और बाबा का सवाल\n1:20 – बाबा का माधवराव को साथ भेजना और मिरीकर की प्रतिक्रिया\n2:02 – चितली में ठहराव और साँप का खतरा\n2:33 – साँप देख बचाव: मिरीकर की जान बचाना\n3:05 – माधवराव का कथित निष्क्रियता और उसके पीछे का रहस्य\n4:22 – शामा की भक्ति और आज्ञाकारिता\n5:14 – बाबा का शामा को लेकर महत्वपूर्ण वचन (अध्याय 22, पद 65)\n6:16 – मिरीकर की कर्मयोग और कष्टों का भाग्य\n7:23 – शामा का समर्पण और बाबा के प्रति पूर्ण विश्वास\n8:13 – शामा का आश्चर्य और बाबा की माया\n9:49 – शामा की गहरी भक्ति और अहंकार त्याग\n11:18 – बाबा का भक्तों के प्रति प्रेम और समर्पण\n12:11 – सच्चे भक्त की संगति का महत्व\n12:59 – संकट से उबरने में भक्तों की भूमिका\n13:52 – सच्चे भक्त की संगति से जीवन में सुरक्षा और मुक्ति …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar",
    "Views": "2,375 views",
    "Likes": "241"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई का भव्य समाधी मंदिर कचरे के ढेर पर क्यो है ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dpuaYLtMGr4",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "कचरे के ढेर पे साई समाधिमंदीर0:00 Introduction 5:12 क्या वास्तूने सच में दोष होते है?6:09 अध्याय ३९ ओवी - १५, १६, १७9:40 वही (कचरेवाली) जगह क्यो ?11:12 दसवे ...",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Serving the Sadguru is not easy.",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5TsaIkBjGk",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "✨Shri Sai Satcharitra Adhyay 6, ovi 127 -137✨(Adhyay 8 Ovi 107-111 Chapter 1, Ovi 57, Chapter 25, Ovi 108)What is True Seva According to Sai Baba?Why did He ...",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Sai never encouraged non-vegetarianism!",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aEIihzTfqMU",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "मांसाहार को साई ने कभी प्रोत्साहन नही दिया#sai #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #...",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "श्रवण के दोष - जिसको सुनना आगया, उसको जीना आगया!",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rs3lTMCmLxA",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "श्रवण के दोष - जिसको सुनना आगया, उसको जीना आगया 🔴 Mahabharat Scenehttps://youtu.be/uBiz7CUIF0U?si=NqF7BsfPvGukTrYc🔴 Sharabhi Movie Scene -https://youtu.be/...",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई जैसा अवतार न भूतो न भविष्यती (साई की विशेषताए)",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ze1OTSMg4Gw",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "साई जैसा अवतार न भूतो न भविष्यती (साई की विशेषताए)#sai #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #tr...",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "लक्ष्मीबाई शिंदेजी को मिले 9 सिक्कों का राज",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tZp8xwyhnGU&pp=0gcJCSMKAYcqIYzv",
    "Transcript": "pay close attention today to what Baba desires behind those nine coins. In Dwarkamai, when Laxmibai used to bring food for Baba, many people would bring food for Baba too in golden and silver plates. But Baba wouldn't even touch that food, and he would wait, saying that Lakshmibai's bhakri (bread) hasn't arrived yet. So, it's the story of a devotee. Baba felt that it was time for Him to leave this body, to conclude this incarnation. So, as he was departing, he decided to give some alms. He gave nine coins. Even today, if we go to the house of Lakshmibai Shinde in Shirdi, we get to see those nine coins, we get to have their sight. When Baba was sitting on the stone in Dwarkamai, facing Laxmibai Shinde, and while giving the nine rupees, first five fell from Baba’s hand, and then four, making it a total of nine rupees. So, it's mentioned in the scriptures that those nine rupees were a symbol of Navavidha Bhakti (nine types of devotion). Now, we all know that Baba bestowed Navavidha Bhakti upon Laxmibai because she had rendered such great service, in the form of meals. See, Baba doesn't need to eat. A person who is enlightened, who has transcended the five elements, doesn't even have a body. So, for such a person, there's no need for food. If he wanted, he could have lived his entire life without food and water and still fulfilled his purpose. But Baba gave a devotee the opportunity to serve. It was a favor to Laxmibai Shinde that Baba waited for food until she arrived. So, for an enlightened being, there's no need for food; the soul doesn't need food; there's no body, so why would He eat? Baba still gave Laxmibai an opportunity to serve, so that she could always prepare meals for him and He could accept them, bringing benefit to her. And what is that benefit? Those nine rupees. So, the most precious thing in life, if anything, is devotion to God, devotion to Baba. And Baba bestowed upon Laxmibai Shinde such a valuable thing as Navavidha Bhakti. Now, we all know that those nine coins symbolize Navavidha Bhakti, but there's another point mentioned in the scripture. Perhaps, I feel, this might not be mentioned in the smaller Hindi texts. I can't cover the entirety of Navavidha Bhakti in one talk; each type of devotion would require its own session. What is Shravan Bhakti (devotion through listening), for example, would take up one whole session. So, I'll cover that later, but for now, let's focus on another aspect: the nine rupees that Baba gave to Laxmibai Shinde, first five and then four. The method of giving first five and then four, not giving all nine rupees at once, is mentioned here. Baba initially placed five rupees in her hand and then four rupees slipped from his hand and into Laxmibai's hand. So, what does it symbolize? In the Eknathi Bhagwat, when Eknath Maharaj describes the characteristics of a true disciple he mentions that there should be nine qualities in the disciple for them to be considered a true disciple of the guru. Only then can they be called a true disciple. So, those nine qualities are described, first five qualities are mentioned and then four more. It means, when describing the qualities of the nine divine virtues that a disciple should possess, the mention of the first five qualities comes first, followed by the mention of the remaining four qualities So, it's clarified in Chapter 42 of the Sai Satcharitra that Baba gave the first five rupees in the same proportion, followed by the remaining four rupees. Look in a literal way even when we go to receive their darshan, it’s a mere symbol. But let’s say, that those coins actually come into your hands one day. Then I'll ask you a question: so what? What does that achieve? Because the true value lies in what the scriptures say. If those coins fall into your hands and you don't possess the light of Navavidha Bhakti, if the nine divine virtues that Baba talks about don't manifest within you, then despite those coins being in your hands, there is no one in this world more impoverished, more beggarly than you. So, if they belong to someone's family, don't assume that they've achieved something grand or attained a high status. Please understand, I'm not against any particular family. I just needed to clarify certain things about where we are stucked. So, you see the coins, you take their darshan, you take a photo, and then what? What does it really accomplish? But what Baba is speaking from His heart about those nine divine virtues, that is the essence of those nine rupees. If this isn't understood, then even if you get those nine coins they are of no value. Look, our problem is that we want to see everything in a materialistic way, but Baba wants to convey something else. That's why I repeatedly mention what Baba says in Chapter 32, that \"What do I want to give you and what are you asking from me? What am I saying and what are you thinking? What have I brought into this world and what are you seeking from me? I have come to distribute gems and pearls, and you stand before me to collect stones with outstretched hands, begging like a beggar. I don't like that.\" Baba has said this several times. Baba carried that agony in his heart throughout his life, that he couldn't find anyone worthy enough to take his treasures. \"I say, bring carts, dig and take away, but there is no one in this universe who is willing to work hard for knowledge. Everyone comes asking, 'Give me, give me.' What do you want? What am I talking about? What are you asking for?\" So, those nine rupees, you might have seen them many times, but now let's take a look at the darshan of those nine divine virtues that Baba is hinting at. What are those nine characteristics that Baba wants to convey? And these are very important qualities, and all nine flaws are present within us. First of all, let me clarify this, and that's why Baba is talking about those nine divine virtues. These are qualities that should be within a disciple. First and foremost, ‘Amaani’, the first divine virtue, means humility. There should be no desire for respect and honor, not even in dreams, ‘Amaani’. If there is even a slight thought in your mind or heart, \"When I go there, people will look at me with great respect, they will respect me, I will be greatly respected when I go, someone will open the car door for me, someone will spread a carpet for me,\" if there are such petty thoughts, then we cannot be Baba's devotees. So, the first divine virtue is humility, Do not desire respect and honour, because the desire for respect always leads to disrespect; it will come eventually. When you receive respect and enjoy it, flaunt it, revel in it. \"This is rubbish\", If your heart responds like this to respect, then disrespect won't hurt you, won't cause you pain, because you rejected respect from the start, so any disrespect won't affect you either, So, the seed of disrespect lies within respect. So, if you want to avoid disgrace, avoid respect. So, the first divine virtue is humility, and Baba says, if you bring this quality within you, I will be satisfied, I will be contented. so, this is my food that you can change yourself. This is the purpose of my life. So, the first divine virtue Baba wants to see in a disciple is humility, modesty. There should be no desire of respect and honor but if you crave for respect or on getting it you felt good Feeling good means it's a signal when disrespected you will end yourself attempting suicide therefore if someone is flattering you then you should address it as rubbish and should remain unaffected by it If you have respect disrespect won't hurt you, won't cause you pain, because you rejected respect from the start, so any disrespect won't affect you either, it's a simple thing. But if you receive respect and enjoy it, then when you face disrespect, your heart will ache. So, the seed of disrespect lies within respect. The second quality is ‘Daksh., which means being ever alert, absolutely vigilant, no room for laziness, ever alert 24/7. Knowing what needs to be done, how it needs to be done, always lively, knowing whom to give top priority to. There are three tasks, and only one can be done because you don’t have much time, so you have to choose every moment, if this work is the most important, then I'll finish it first. If you don't have the quality of giving priority, then you don't have efficiency in your life because time is the same for everyone; everyone has 24 hours, did anyone get 36 hours from God? So, time cannot be extended, nor can it be reduced, but we can change what we choose, \"No, this work is more important for me at this time, so I'll finish this first,\" that's Daksh, alertness. It means having such clarity that you know which decision to make at which time, which will be beneficial for you. So, that ever alertness, that efficiency is the second quality. First was Amaani, and the second is Daksh. And the third quality is ‘Nirmatsar’, which means being free from envy or jealousy. Even if you have to die for it, never harbor hatred or envy towards anyone, never make anyone your enemy, because if you hold resentment towards someone in your mind, before harming them, it harms us. Never hold enmity, never foster animosity towards anyone, and on the contrary, if you realize that someone harbors ill feelings towards you, then as soon as possible, surrender to them and clear the air. Don't harbor hatred towards others, and if you realize that someone harbors animosity towards you, then even if you have to surrender them, surrender, but remove that animosity from their heart. Baba is talking about the third quality, ‘Nirmatsar’. The third coin that Baba expects from us. The whole world thinks that Baba has given us nine coins, but if we look deeply, Baba is actually saying that this third quality is what I want to see in you. I want to see humility in you, I want to see alertness in you, and I want to see you free from envy and jealousy. Don't allow negative emotions to enter your life. Never let the feeling of envy enter your life, no matter who the person is, no matter how wrong they have done to you. Yes, you can distance yourself from someone with love, but you cannot harbor hatred or envy towards them. That was the third quality. First was humility, alertness, and third is freedom from envy and jealousy. The fourth quality is being ‘Nirmam’, which means being free from attachment. A disciple should be free from attachment, detached from all forms of desires, whether it's for home, jewellery, cars, office, millions of rupees, or family. If the master has bestowed you with all these things because of your Karmas, if you have a big factory, luxurious cars, high status, immense wealth, or a large family, then live among everyone, give love to everyone, respect everyone, and provide comfort to everyone, but don't expect anything in return from others, from your family. That's what being ‘Nirmam’ is all about. The power to cut off attachments. What people think, that cutting off attachments means leaving your home, it is a very third-rate mentality. It doesn't mean leaving your home, abandoning millions of wealth; it means even while having all these things, you are untouched by them, your mind doesn't dwell on them, you completely know that they are impermanent, one day either I'll leave them or they'll leave me. This clarity is completely ingrained in that person, that's why they are nirmam. Nirmam means someone in whose life there is no attachment left, not to children, not to mother, not to father, not to spouse, not even to one's own body. But they live among everyone, fulfill their responsibilities, provide the best education to their children, make them responsible citizens, but even while doing all this, they remain detached, not attached to them. That's what being nirmam is all about. The fifth quality is ‘Gurusevapar’, which means living life solely for serving the guru. This life is solely for serving my guru, and my guru has complete authority over it. Whatever he says, I just have to follow that, that's the true service, knowing the guru's will, living accordingly, that's Gurusevapar. Gurusevapar doesn't mean bowing down and groveling at someone's feet. That's very easy to do, people mistake flattery for service. Now, if there are ten disciples, the one who flatters the most is considered the greatest disciple of all, no. Baba is not talking about such a person, he's a fake guru and a fake disciple. If a person doesn't have the capability to make out whether the disciple is worthy or not, then how can he be a Guru? If someone is just flattering, then they are considered good, but if they don't flatter, then they are worthless. The relationship between a guru and disciple nowadays is like this. In a true guru-disciple relationship, the guru doesn't even need to say anything with their mouth; the disciple understands and starts doing the work accordingly. That's true service, that's real service, where there's no need to speak with words. Nowadays, in the Samadhi Mandir, it's like, \"decorate it like this, decorate it like that, spend lakhs of rupees for festivals, adorn Baba with gold, adorn Baba with a diamond crown.\" Is this what service is, is this what Baba wants? Just once, try to see from Baba's perspective, just once ask Baba, \"Do you really want a crown of gold?\" He'll pick it up and throw it away, saying, Baba came as an ascetic and came to give asceticism, but we’ve turned him into a wealthy person, no one can be more despicable than us. He came as ascetic, he wanted to give asceticism, but we turned him into god of wealth. Alright, those who have given it must have had good intentions, because giving is also a big thing. There's another aspect to it as well, I don't deny that, but I'm speaking from Baba's perspective, that Baba should be asked once what he truly wants, whether he really wants that thing. If you have the courage, then ask him and give him what he truly desires. But no we cannot do this, But ask Baba once and see if he's happy with our service. See what answer you get. Only one thing he will say, आपून नही रे बापू किस मे These are his words from the 25th chapter. In all these matters, I won't be trapped, you'll be. You can't trap me. For you, it will be a crown of diamonds, for you, it will be a golden throne. For me, there is nothing more precious than heaps of soil. This will be the answer. Baba has said that if you give me one rupee, I will give you a hundred rupees. This promise sounds very grand . If one rupee will yield a hundred rupees, then if I put in ten thousand rupees, how much will I get? People are very clever. If one rupee yields a hundred, then if I put in ten thousand rupees, how much will I get? Now, I have to put in 10 rupees, then if I put in ten thousand, it will make ten lakhs. Such a big gamble wouldn't exist anywhere in the world. Such a big betting game where you get 100 for one, What meaning did we infer? what Baba was supposed to say in the vow, Baba said, \"If you give me one quality, then I will convert it into hundred qualities.\" This was the promise ,but we changed it and made it like this: if I put in one rupee, then I will get 100 rupees. Wow, people are very clever. If Baba truly said that if you put in one rupee, then he will give you 100 rupees, then tell me, where else in the world is there a bigger gamble than the Samadhi Mandir? If this vow is true that after putting in one, you get a hundred, then you are unnecessarily putting money in the stock market. Without reason, you are going to the casino and sitting there. Without reason, this gambling is being kept open. Then there is the Sai Mandir of Shirdi, right? Putting in 10,000 and earning 10 lakhs. Now see, me talking like this makes you feels bad, but you have brought Baba to such a low level, this is the trouble. Now see, me talking like this makes you feels bad, but you have brought Baba to such a low level, this is the trouble. Kabir ji says,\"Guru ki seva kare, kare n maan se kaam, kahe kabir sevak nahi jo mange chauguna daam\" If service to the true Guru is being done and Baba is asking for something as Dakshina, or if I feel like giving something, then after giving, the sentiment should be, \"O Master, this is your grace once again.\" You took away these ₹10,000 from me in the form of greed within me, and you eliminated the greed within me. In exchange for this, I should receive millions of rupees. If this sentiment is there, then you have turned the Sai Samadhi Mandir into a gambling market After giving, there shouldn't even be a feeling that I put in ₹10,000; instead, tears should well up in my eyes, feeling that I could take out ₹10,000 from within me and put it for you. This wisdom you have given me.In this way, I will be able to rid myself of greed, and detachment will arise within me. If we give with this sentiment, then your life is blessed. But by putting in one, we will get a 100. This is what happens to 99% of people. Then the same question will be asked again. Ask Baba once and see baba this month have dropped 8 crores, are you satisfied? The answer will be, \"अपुन नहीं रे बाबू किस मे\" I am not satisfied with these things. I came as a beggar, wanting to give dispassion, but you made me rich. So, this kind of service is not expected. I repeatedly say that it's up to him what he wants. So, this was it, Baba gave ₹5 to Lakshmibai Shinde first. \"amani, daksh, nirmam, nirmatsar, and guru sevapar\" hese five qualities are the first ₹5, and later they say the 6th characteristic, which Baba expects from us. Asava paramaarthjinyasu How to attain the supreme truth, how to attain the supreme father, one should be dedicated to this. One should understand his thirst, should know his thirst. I like the one who lives for it. Baba says so. The curiosity of the ultimate truth, within which is so much that if one is living, it is for the ultimate truth, and if one is dying, it is for the ultimate truth. these six signs: in the world, neither does he want to become a millionaire nor build a mansion, nor does he want to buy a Mercedes car, nor does he desire much fame and glory. He has not become a celebrity. He is far from these useless things, and he only wants the unflinching devotion of the Baba. Such is the thirst of those , whose curiosity is focused only and only that human being is loved by me. So, this was the 6th sign. The seventh sign is the unwavering inner kingdom, whose inner being is unwavering, which is never swayed. It never changes. He does not panic about situations, he always remains the same, stays stable, whether a storm strikes or whether very good days are shown. The one who remains stable in both situations, who remains neutral whose internal, that person is loved by me So, this was the seventh sign of unwavering inner kingdom.\" The eighth sign is said to be 'Jai Thavi Nahin Asuya' It means not to have jealousy jealousy. a person who doesn't know about this, Such a person is my most beloved. This is the eighth sign, but here, jealousy is rampant everywhere. It seems to you that in the world of spirituality, there should not be any jealousy. It's only in the external world where one industrialist is looking at another industrialist and thinking, \"Oh, this one has moved ahead of me,\" or one professional is comparing themselves to another professional and feeling envy. That's okay, as they are worldly people, and jealousy is natural there. But in the spiritual world, there is even more jealousy. Those who talk about God's stories, those who talk about God 24 hours a day, those who do satsang 24 hours a day—there is as much jealousy among them as there may not be in anyone else. Out of the 500 people I have captured, not a single one should escape; they are my scapegoats, not a single one should escape. If someone else is a hundred times better than me, they will still tell four wrong things about that person, spread negativity, so that not even one out of 500 is missed. If I miss one, how will my business run? Then what will happen to me, who is receiving so much respect and honor? If I have five or ten, it's up to me. I shouldn't let go of any of the ten in my hands. I am giving an example. There is a Palakhi leader who takes about two to two and a half thousand people to Shirdi. Now, I have also gone to that person many times and said, \"You take so many youngsters with you.\" Please give depth to this correct biography or watch one of my sessions because so many youngsters are coming, I don't know if someone's future will change from one session, but I'm afraid that if I call someone, then two and a half thousand people will slip away from my hands. This is called jealousy, this is called envy. Understand, I'm speaking on this biography, and if someone else is speaking on the same biography, then they are more afraid that if this person hears about it from my people, then he might leave me somewhere. So, what does that person do? He finds faults saying that this person has flaws, these people do this, those people do that. our way absolutely correct, he repeatedly emphasizes, so that I continue to rule over those on whom I have authority. But they don't even think for a moment about reciprocating, that there is such a big light in front of me, instead, I should push them towards it. Oh, to hell with my ego! If, however, he gives those people who have faith in me more light than me in front of me, and if I direct 500 people towards him instead of me, then how high would I rise in Baba's eyes? But no, because there is so much jealousy that out of the 500 in my hands, not even one slips away. To elaborate this topic Among the beloved devotees of Baba, there was rao bahadur sathe ce a Brahmin named Megha, hailing from a family in Gujarat. Megha, with a heart so pure, approached him seeking employment and serving him. Witnessing the divine qualities in Raav Bahadur Saathe, and perceiving his righteousness, Megha regarded him as a guru in his heart. He considered Raav Bahadur Saathe equivalent to a guru and served him with complete honesty. Now look at raav bahadur sathe's purity of mind. it appears to him as if megha is a genuine diamond, fearing he(megha) might wander. He wonders what he could offer in return. He sees himself as a flickering lamp, while there sits a saint in Shirdi, shining like the sun. Why not send him to his doorstep? Says to Megha, \"Megha, since you possess such a pure heart, listen to me. you consider him whom I regard as gurus, then go directly to their refuge. You will find such people now. Go and search for them! What characters they were, what people they were, truly remarkable individual's. The man knows that he completely regards me as his guru, and he is fully devoted to me, completely. He is merely bowing in front of an ordinary lamp. I want him to bow in front of the sun. uch purity, such truthfulness, is impossible to find in today's age. And this applies to me as well. If there's someone who shines brighter than me, I'll pray sincerely to Baba that my ego doesn't interfere. Our group will go to and learn from their feet because humility is a sign of a pure mind. Envy can only be overcome this way, there's no other way. Then the last quality, the 9th virtue, is not to indulge in wasteful speech. Doesn't waste his/hers words even for a moment, doesn't speak without reason, doesn't engage in gossip, doesn't spend my time praising myself, doesn't waste time in talking unnecessarily, doesn't indulge in gossiping about people or talking about other's affairs Someone who always refrains from unnecessary chatter always seems to speak with great value, as if every word that comes out of their mouth costs a million. They carefully choose their words, while speaking , never wasting their words needlessly. The one who speaks the truth and speaks for the benefit of others. Where to speak and where to stay silent, Such a person rarely faces deception in life. Always remember one thing in life, speak only where there is respect for words, otherwise silently leave from there and move on. A better couplet is when Kabir Ji speaks, हीरा था ना खोले जहां कुंजड़ों की हॉट If you have diamonds and pearls to distribute, to speak, to spend, then spend it carefully because your words are not less than diamonds and pearls, haut means market Meaning those who sit in the market for business , he's says don't disclose or make a deal of diamonds to those selling mustards and cumins, What capability do they have to assess the worth of diamonds? Quietly put your words in your bag and move on, because there is not a single person there who appreciates your diamonds, who understands your heart, or who understands your words. So silently tie that bag of diamonds and leave. So he's saying not to unnecessarily waste your words in gossip, neither in praising others nor in criticizing others without reason. If speech is to be spent, it should only be spent in praising the true guru, other than that speech should not be spent. And take a position quickly, that where you have to speak and where to listen. some people just want to tell, and not hear anything. All you have to do is listen to them patiently and take your diamond and leave Don't make futile efforts to convey there, it's a waste of time for no reason. Because such people only know to speak they have no interest in listening. All these divine qualities, Baba expects from us through 9 rupees, and if these 9 signs are not there, then he cannot be Baba's true devotee. So, if someone is a true devotee, and if Baba expects from us, then these are the 9 signs what's baba want's. These are the 9 coins that we have seen many times in physical form, and people created a fuss out of it. Baba want's to see these 9 qualities within us. These are the real 9 coins",
    "Description": "📖 श्री साईं सच्चरित्र | लक्ष्मीबाई शिंदे की कथा\nभक्ति, भाव और मोक्ष की ओर बढ़ती एक सूक्ष्म यात्रा\nयह सिर्फ एक रोटी की कहानी नहीं है — यह उस निष्काम सेवा और प्रेम की कथा है, जो आत्मा को भक्ति के परम सत्य तक पहुँचा देती है।\n\n🌾 क्या बाबा उस रोटी को ग्रहण कर रहे थे — या उस रोटी में छिपे भाव, त्याग और समर्पण को?\n🌺 क्या लक्ष्मीबाई की सेवा साईं बाबा को किसी दिव्य स्तर पर छू जाती थी?\n🕉️ और क्या उसी के माध्यम से बाबा ने भक्ति के नौ मार्गों की ओर संकेत किया — जो आत्मा को मोक्ष की ओर ले जाते हैं?\n\nइस अध्याय में सूखी रोटी, खीर, दूध, चीनी और अंततः अग्नि — ये सब केवल भोजन के प्रतीक नहीं हैं, बल्कि गहरे आत्मिक संकेत हैं।\n\n✨ साईं बाबा किसी वस्तु को उसके रूप में नहीं, बल्कि उसमें छुपे गुण, भावना और चेतना को स्वीकार करते हैं।\n\nयह वीडियो एक ऐसी सूक्ष्म आध्यात्मिक यात्रा को सामने लाता है, जहाँ बाबा एक सरल घटना में आत्मा की तमोगुण से सत्त्वगुण तक की यात्रा को प्रकट करते हैं।\nक्या यह केवल भोजन की लीला है — या आत्मा के परिष्कार की एक अद्भुत प्रक्रिया?\n\n🌸 बाबा द्वारा लक्ष्मीबाई को दिया गया विशेष प्रेम, क्या यह संकेत नहीं कि जब समर्पण पूर्ण हो, तो स्वयं साईं उस भक्ति का उत्तर बन जाते हैं?\n\n🙏 यह वीडियो उन साधकों के लिए है, जो साईं बाबा की लीलाओं को केवल घटनाएँ नहीं, बल्कि उनके भीतर छुपे आध्यात्मिक संदेश के रूप में समझना चाहते हैं।\n\n🌼 बाबा की हर सरल सी प्रतीत होने वाली लीला के भीतर छिपा होता है कोई गहरा रहस्य, कोई आत्मिक जागृति — जिसे केवल सच्ची श्रद्धा की दृष्टि ही पहचान सकती है।\n\n🎥 आइए, देखिए और अनुभव कीजिए —\nलक्ष्मीबाई की इस अनुपम भक्ति में साईं बाबा की दिव्यता को।\nशायद आपकी आत्मा को भी इस कथा में अपना प्रतिबिंब दिख जाए।\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiCharitra #LakshmibaiShinde #SaiLeela #SelflessDevotion #BhaktiPath #SaiTeachings #SpiritualMessage #sairam \n\n📖 Shri Sai Satcharitra | The Story of Lakshmibai Shinde\nA Subtle Journey of Devotion, Emotion, and Liberation\nThis is not just a story about offering a piece of bread — it is a profound tale of selfless service and love, leading the soul toward the ultimate truth of devotion.\n\n🌾 Was Baba accepting the bread — or the emotion, sacrifice, and devotion hidden within it?\n🌺 Did Lakshmibai’s pure service touch Sai Baba on a divine and spiritual level?\n🕉️ And through her, did Baba point toward the nine paths of devotion, which guide the soul toward liberation?\n\nIn this chapter, each simple offering — dry bread, sweetened milk, sugar, kheer, and ultimately fire — becomes a symbol of deep spiritual truth.\nSai Baba never accepted mere physical items — He accepted the qualities, intention, and consciousness within them.\n\n✨ This video brings to light that subtle spiritual journey, where Baba, through an ordinary moment, reveals the soul’s transformation from tamas (inertia) to sattva (purity).\n\nIs this just a story about food — or is it a divine process of soul purification, recognizable only through the vision of Sai?\n\n🌸 The special love that Baba showed to Lakshmibai — was it a sign that when surrender is complete, Sai Himself becomes the answer to that devotion?\n\n🙏 This video is for all sincere seekers who wish to see Sai Baba’s leelas not just as events, but as spiritual messages hidden beneath the surface.\n\n🌼 In every seemingly simple act of Baba, lies a profound spiritual secret, a quiet awakening — seen only through the lens of true devotion.\n\n🎥 Come, watch and feel —\nthe divine presence of Sai Baba in Lakshmibai’s unmatched devotion.\nWho knows — perhaps your own soul may see its reflection in this story.\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiCharitra #LakshmibaiShinde #SaiLeela #SelflessDevotion #BhaktiPath #SaiTeachings #SpiritualMessage #SaiRam …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "7,091 views",
    "Likes": "400"
  },
  {
    "Title": "दुःख वो अमृत है , जिससे पाप धुलते है !",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kdi6ShM5A78",
    "Transcript": "My son do not intimidated by grief. Grief is that elixir which washes off the sins. I m not far from you, i m within you outside you pervading everywhere misery is the elixir with which sins are dusted, it's a one liner But if everyone starts applying this dialogue to themselves, it's a problematic thing to do. So, then he'll consider the pain he's suffering from his own foolishness as nectar, whereas it is poison To whom is that words spoken? To which person it applies the promise that misery is the elixir with which sins are dusted, it is spoken of the person who wants to repent of his mistake, who is crying in remorse moment by moment, who is struggling to get out of his ignorance as much as the fish without water. Then for that person, that dailouge sits accurately, that misery is that elixir with which sins are dusted It means if someone is experiencing sorrow in their life, it's coming to end their past karma. But if a fool is experiencing sorrow in their life, if a dishonest person is experiencing sorrow in their life, if a cruel person is experiencing sorrow in their life, then it cannot be nectar, it's poison. sometimes we become so emotional, that every word is ours, spoken for us, so whether we fit into that word or not, we do not understand, because there is a lot of detail, so if there is someone to open the layer, then it will be clear to whom this word is for, Now look, when we heard this, we all felt that oh wow, great are the words, sorrow is that immortal concatenation, that washes away sins. I believe it's one of the best lines from the movie, and it truly is nectar. But if a dishonest person applies that dialogue, those words to himself, then its importance, their efficacy, will be lost. There are more than 9300 sayings in Sai Satcharitra but to whom does each promise apply, which promise applies for the person who has reached which stage, suppose a man's spiritual journey is going on at a very low level, so there are some sayings for him, If they progress a bit further, then there are some verses for them. If they ascend even higher, then there are some verses for them. For someone who has reached the pinnacle, who has reached the principles of non-duality, for them, there is 50th chapter So, everything isn't for everyone; one should understand where they stand. There should be enough honesty to recognize one's capacity, to know where one stands. If I am at the level of a nursery, and if I wander around with an IAS exam book, then how foolish would that be, right? So, there are certain things that need to be very clear. If there was finest lines in the movie, one of the finest lines from the movie Guide, \"Sorrow is the nectar that washes away sins,\" if we missed that, then we haven't really watched Guide. That's why Baba has devoted two entire chapters, that O human keeps talking about knowledge throughout his life, discusses profound matters, listens from here, listens from there, reads from here, reads from there, talks about the knowledge of the world, while your every cell is steeped in ignorance. Why don't you talk about ignorance, which you're experiencing. The knowledge you're discussing is a figment of your imagination, and no guru in the whole world has explained it as well as Baba has tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśhnena sevayā upadekṣhyanti te jñānaṁ jñāninas tattva-darśhinaḥ so Baba is saying, stop discussing this knowledge, and look within yourself, see how much ignorance lies within you, , for that writhe in agony, repent, shed tears, and stop boasting about this knowledge. So, One should stop preaching knowledge to people. The right to preach knowledge is earned only by someone who has gone through the whole process, who has reached that pinnacle. Only they can tell what it's all about. Here, everyone talks about knowledge. See how foolish it is! From head to toe, you're engulfed in ignorance, it's not the topic of discussion There's not a word about it, no repent, no humility, no sorrow, no prayers. And for the imaginary knowledge, you spend your whole life talking nonsense about it. a very famous shayri of Galib which resonates with the topic \"Umra bhar Ghalib yahi bhool karta raha, dhool chehre pe thi, aur aaina saaf karta raha.\" so in reality blabbering about knowledge is like cleansing the mirror and to clean mind is to look for ignorance within So this is the fundamental difference And this is where the difference doesn't come into play. And this is what Baba has taught, not just for one community or religion, whether it's Christianity, Islam, or all the various sects of Hinduism, He presented that shloka of Bhagwad Gita to the whole world in a different way. te jñānaṁ, has the elision mark before word 'Jnana' which is silent those who know grammar are well aware of it If I were to take that avagraha, then it would make it 'agyan'. But Chandorkar says,\"how can Guru teach Ignorance?\" when the whole world gives teachings on knowledge? And you say that gurus give teachings on ignorance. So Baba says, that's exactly what I have to make people understand, that the whole world is wrong by talking about knowledge. If the so-called guru sitting in front of a person is unable to reveal the ignorance within them, then he's a fake guru. And there should be two qualities if he's truly a guru. Firstly, whoever comes in front of him should be able to show him their ignorance. Secondly, he should have the power to make them suffer so much from that ignorance that they think, \"When will I get out of this?\" If he can awaken such a yearning, then he's a true guru. If Baba wants me to keep in this ignorance, then he must as well kill me because I can't bear this ignorance anymore. If consciousness of that devotee has reached this state, then it's in the right direction. And Baba has taught the whole world by taking the refuge of the verses of the Bhagavad Gita. And the world today doesn't call Baba a sanatani Tell me who is sanatani more than Baba/ So, that dialogue, I felt like I should say something about it. \"Dukh wo amrit hai, jisse paap dhulte hain.\" But that pain isn't nectar for everyone; it's only nectar for those who are struggling with their ignorance, dying, struggling to get out of it like a fish floundering. It's only for that person. If any pain comes into his life, then it's nectar for them, the one who washes away all their sins. Sometimes, what happens is that we end up doing foolish things upon foolishness, wrongdoing upon wrongdoing, and then, on top of that, we say, \"Baba os doing.\" No these are consequence of your doings. Look, it becomes our habit to inflict all our actions and deeds on Baba and continue our instincts \"Baba has told me to do it therefore i'm doing such\", sometime even a true fellow is trodden since fake is prevailing Sadguru is the doer but you are certain about it when you are treading the path When you put your 100% efforts in right direction with clarity and good deeds then whatever the results are been done by Sadguru But on wrong doings if Baba is given the doer ship then that's problematic It takes time and practice to eliminate doer ship Always in life one should have a clarity that if a misdeed is done that because of oneself and a good deed happens its because of Baba as a rouge like me is unworthy to execute it Whenever a wrong deed is performed owing to the impurity of mind then look yourself as the doer. Baba has nothing to do here. So if this clarity is firmed then you won't sway from the path, Baba won't let this happen and more your mind gets purified and your ego is melted and when you become altruistic still you have to use 'i' in dealings as without it dealings are curtailed So when mind gets pure and if that person out of dealings uses 'i', its pure 'i' talking not the impure one the 'i' we use now is impure even after the purity of mind one is compelled to use 'i' to perform dealings but the soul. the supreme soul is identifying itself as 'i' not the body so there is vast difference between 'i' identified by a saint and us for our is impure and their's is pure since they are saying being that the supreme soul and we say 'i' being impure soul. Sometimes people criticizes saints on using 'i'. But without 'I' dealings are not possible if we tend to find flaws in it as well how's this possible? for real world transactions 'i' is must rest he knows his own internal feelings Always it's a goodwill if we put Baba at the doer's place but do evoke the power to take the responsible unto oneself when misdeed is done \"This is my mistake\", one should posses the power to accept it and the power to say it to someone and surrender \"Pain is that elixir which dusts off the sin\" a dailouge from the movie 'Guide'. What a line, Best one liner from the movie. soul of it because my deeds i have received these fruits then why should i cry? So, Baba, don't show even a little mercy towards me, and remember, the True Guru is washing away my past actions, then it is necessary for them to cause me pain, but along with that, if due to which reason He are making me suffer, He cannot purify the mind, then what is the True Guru for? Only by the hooks of past actions, they are pouring down suffering upon me, because karma is like that. Now, this is nature's work, nature does its job. Maya's job is that, \"O human, you have committed so many sins, now you have to suffer this punishment.\" If even the True Guru does only that much, then isn't that also Maya's work? But what do True Gurus do? On one hand, they wash away past actions, but along with that, they also purify the mind. Because if the purification of the mind doesn't happen, then it will perform sinful actions again, then it will accumulate more past actions, so washing away past actions alone is not a big deal, along with that, the impurity of the mind should also be washed away. Because when the impurity of the mind is completely washed away, dirty actions will not be performed, then past actions will not be accumulated, and the time for experiencing past actions will not come. So, True Gurus do two things, they prepare for experiencing past actions, and on the other hand, they also cleanse the impurity of the mind, because it is known that until purity is not achieved at the root, wrongful actions will continue, and this past action will continue to be formed, the account will keep running. So, a true Guru is one who not only makes you drink the nectar of suffering but also sweetens the impurity of the mind, so that no misdeeds happen by me and moving ahead my ego is erased where good and bad both fall away, where only \"I\" remains, that state is where duality falls away, then that is the highest state, and what was shown in the ending of the movie, that \"I am, I am alone,\" upon that the movie ends.",
    "Description": "#sai #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #like #comment #share#explore #fyp #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #values #youtube#zili#shraddha#saburi #newgeneration#peace #saisatcharitra#young #corespirituality #saileelarahasya#viral#saiamritvachan #saiamritwani #krishnajisai …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "5,430 views",
    "Likes": "341"
  },
  {
    "Title": "ब्रम्हानन्दं परमसुखदं (श्लोक की व्याख्या) सच्चा सद्गुरू कौन ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ugIaJSvQG4o",
    "Transcript": "ब्रह्मानन्दं परमसुखदं केवलं ज्ञानमूर्तिं द्वन्द्वातीतं गगनसदृशं तत्वमस्यादिलक्ष्यम् एकं नित्यं विमलमचलं सर्वधीसाक्षिभूतं भावातीतं त्रिगुणरहितं सद्गुरुं तं नमामि This is a verse from the Guru Gita. How many people know the meaning of this verse? Please raise your hands, oh my goodness, not a single one. This is a very famous verse from the Guru Gita because this verse explains the definition of a Sadguru. Who is considered a Sadguru? The explanation is of the Sadguru, that after how many qualities manifest in a person, they become a Sadguru. So, these are those lines, each word of this verse explains the Sadguru. Brahmanandam parama sukhadam kevalam jnaanamurtim Dvandvaateetam gaganasadrusham tatvamasyadi lakshyam Ekam nityam vimalamachalam sarvadheesaakshibhuutam Bhaavaateetam triguna rahitam sadgurum tam namaami. So, let me do one thing, let's explore today's discourse through the meaning of this verse. What are those qualities that should be found in a person, so that after seeing them, it can be said that yes, so many qualities are present in this person, then this person is a Sadguru. So, all those qualities are described in this verse. As we dive into the meaning of each word of the verse, \"Brahmanandam,\" the first word, refers to a state where a person is immersed in the bliss of Brahman for twenty-four hours, The state where even for a moment the joy does not decrease or vanish, such a state which has been attained is that of the Sadguru. Paramasukhadam, the top most bliss of the world. The one who is experiencing the supreme bliss is the Sadguru. Now, let's see, from our perspective, the interpretation of happiness differs from the Sadguru's interpretation of happiness. What we perceive as happiness, which is the enjoyment of sensory pleasures, might seem like happiness to us, but for the Sadguru, it's not happiness, it's mere poison. The one who is experiencing the supreme happiness among all joys is the Sadguru. kevalam jnaanamurtim - They are solely the embodiment of knowledge, filled only with wisdom from head to toe, with not even a trace of ignorance. This is the Sadguru. And then they say, those who are beyond the dualities of the world. What are the dualities of the world? The dualities of the world are pleasure and pain, small and large, beauty and ugliness, life and death, knowledge and ignorance, good and bad, nectar and poison. All of these are the dualities, and this entire universe, this world, is created from these dualities. If there is morning, there is night; if there is light, there is darkness; if there is goodness, there is evil; if there is fragrance, And despite wishing to overcome these dualities until our last breath, we won't be able to stop them because the Creator has made the world like this, it is made up of dualities. A song comes to mind, a very famous song, perhaps everyone has heard it. You render shape to clay on the rotating wheel Oh God! you are a mad potter You mix all things like soil, water, light ,wind and space which develops into a sky Your creation does not have any bound for top or expanse So, what it says is that this universe, this world that is made, is made of soil, water, and air. Imagine the weight of the earth, how heavy it is. Estimate it. The entire world rests upon it. It is so heavy. On the other hand, air, meaning, it is so light that it flows. Now, how opposite are these two? Just think, the earth is so heavy, and air is so light. Fire, how much power of combustion it has, how much heat there is. And water, how cool it is. Such are this five elements. and the Creator has created the universe with these opposites. So, when there is duality in the creation of universe. So, how can we escape from these dualities? Therefore, there is life; so there is death. If there is happiness, then there is sorrow. If there is evil, then it goodness. If there is day, then there is night. If there is light, then there is darkness. This is called duality, so no human being is spared from these dualities. If someone says, \"Lord, why did you create it like this? You only had to create day, why did you create night? Or you only had to create night, why did you create day? Look how much suffering there is from the heat. Why did you create heat? might have kept only cold. This won't work; it's flawed in His design because this world is made of dualities, it's constructed with opposite things. On one hand, the earth is so heavy, and on the other hand, air is so light. On one hand, there is water, so dense, and on the other hand, fire is so hot. So, the Creator has created the universe like this. If His creation is like this, then we won't be able to escape from these dualities. Only and only the desire to enjoy happiness, which is our emotion, will never be fulfilled completely. Sorrow will come with it, whether you want it or not. Only joy, only and only happiness, only and only peace, can't be achieved by us. If you are desiring peace, then unrest will also come into your life. If there is a hunger for respect, then you will also have to endure insult. This is duality because the creation of the Creator is like that. But the Sadguru, what did he say in the verse? The Sadguru is beyond these dualities. He has conquered both of these, he has risen above both of these. The one who transcends dualities is the Sadguru, Brahmanandam parama sukhadam kevalam jnaanamurtim Dvandvaateetam, Sadguru is beyond these dualities, whereas we are not. These dualities will be imposed upon us because we have not yet risen above the cycle of the world. We are still within the cycle of the world, so we have to face these dualities. We have to face both the heat and the cold, goodness and evil. The Creator has placed both the mind and intellect within us, so this duality will continue. But the Sadguru is beyond these dualities, hence, Dvandvaateetam. Gaganasadrusham, now our existence, is limited. Its limited to where we are sitting. My existence is limited to a chair. I can see you all as much as I can. I don't know what is going on behind my back, because the expansiveness of my being is limited This is because the extent of my being is limited to the body. However, the expansiveness of a True Guru is not limited. Just as the sky is present everywhere, similarly, a True Guru is present everywhere. Therefore, it is said, 'Gagan Sadrusam', gaganasadrusham tatvamasyadi lakshyam - Now what is the real purpose of Sadguru's incarnation; Tatvamasyi You are me, there is no difference between us. Imparting this knowledge is the sole purpose of Sadguru. Besides this, there is no other aim of the incarnation. That is the Sadguru. That's why it's said, 'Tat Tvam Asi' (You are That), where the aim is singular, firming up the statement of identity between the devotee and the divine. there is no difference between us and it is for this reason that the Sadguru assumes the incarnation. Then it is said, 'Ekam' (The One), where there is no room for duality. The one who has experienced that He is prevailing in the entire Universe. That is the Sadguru. In every living being, in every object, it is only me. The one with such a realization is Sadguru. That's why it's called 'Ekam, I am the soul, I am the Supreme Brahman, and my presence pervades entirely, within every animate and inanimate creation. There is neither any object nor any human separated from me. Therefore, it is said, \"Ekam. I am one, and I am complete. No one is separate from me. Ekam, nityam, ekam nityam vimalamachalam, so it is said ekam nityam. Today, we are alive. Today, someone is 40, 50, 60 years old whatever it may be. But there will come a time when this earth will swallow us, our breath will depart. We are not eternal beings. We are here today, showing ourselves to the world today. There will come a time when we will not be seen, our end will come, This means the end of the body is definite, whether is today, tomorrow, after 50 years, or after 10 years, cannot be said, but there will come a time when we will not be seen. Regarding the true Guru, it is said, \"ekam nityam,\" meaning they were, they are, and they will always be. When in the body, Baba existed. Even when not in the body, Baba is present today. And even before assuming the body, Baba existed, that state which is of the Supreme Brahma is eternal not body, it will end, So, in the definition, it is said \"ekam nityam vimlam achalam,\" Vimlam, meaning free from impurity. There is no impurity, no blemish in the consciousness. That is vimlam. Vimlam achalam, and another achal, whose nature is steady, regardless of whatever circumstances arise in the world. Even if storms come, troubles come,Standing in front of death itself for a moment, one who remains unperturbed, such an individual is said to be as steadfast as the mountain. That is Sadguru Bhavatiitam means beyond these small emotions. Being under the control of attachments, being close to someone, distancing from someone in whom these qualities are not present. This is my favorite, this is not my favorite, I love these a lot, I hate these, beyond such negative, positive emotions, beyond fake emotions, is bhavatiitam, devoid of the three qualities, free from all three qualities, which neither can be touched by Satva Guna nor by Tamo Guna, that is trigun rahitam. So many qualities that exist in a person, I bow hundreds of times at the feet of the true Guru. Sadgurum tam namaami. This is the definition of the SadGuru, Baba, Datta, Swami samarth, Gajanan Maharaj Because all the qualities described are present in these great personalities, But in this age of Kaliyuga, anyone becomes a Sadguru. This is the problem, In every alley, there is a Sadguru. who do we call Sadguru? The one with all these qualities who is complete, is the Guru or the Sadguru Brahmanandam parama sukhadam kevalam jnaanamurtim Dvandvaateetam gaganasadrusham tatvamasyadi lakshyam Ekam nityam vimalamachalam sarvadheesaakshibhuutam Bhaavaateetam triguna rahitam sadgurum tam namaami. This is the interpretation of Sadguru, this is the definition of Sadguru. I hope this verse had clarified who can be called a Sadguru and what qualities they should possess.",
    "Description": "यह वीडियो कृष्णाजी द्वारा प्रस्तुत एक गहन आध्यात्मिक व्याख्या है, जहाँ “ब्रह्मानन्दं परमसुखदं” गुरुगीता श्लोक सद्गुरु की दिव्य विशेषताओं को प्रकट करता है –\n\n“ब्रह्मानन्दं परमसुखदं केवलं ज्ञानमूर्तिं\nद्वंद्वातीतं गगनसदृशं तत्वमस्यादिलक्ष्यम्।\nएकं नित्यं विमलमचलं सर्वधीसाक्षिभूतं\nभावातीतं त्रिगुणरहितं सद्गुरुं तं नमामि॥”\n\nसद्गुरु वह हैं जो ब्रह्मानंद स्वरूप, ज्ञानमूर्ति और द्वंद्वातीत हैं। वे साधक को संसार के छल–कपट और सुख–दुःख के द्वंद्वों से परे ले जाकर परम सत्य का बोध कराते हैं।\n\n“विठ्ठला तू वेडा कुंभार” इसी सत्य को उजागर करता है कि जीवन के उतार-चढ़ाव, चोट और थपकियाँ सद्गुरु की करुणा का ही रूप हैं। वे हमें गढ़ते हैं, हमारी अशुद्धियाँ दूर करते हैं और आत्मा को “तत्त्वम् असि” – तुम वही परम तत्व हो – के बोध तक ले जाते हैं।\n\nसद्गुरु वह दिव्य शक्ति हैं, जो साधक को संसार के द्वंद्वों से पार कर, ब्रह्मानंद के शाश्वत अनुभव तक पहुँचाते हैं – जहाँ गुरु, शिष्य और परमात्मा एक ही हो जाते हैं।\nयह वीडीओ सद्गुरु के लक्षण और द्विव्य गुणोको उजागर करता है। ऐसेही अनुभवजन्य यात्रा से जुडे रहने के लिए साईलीला रहस्य युट्यूब चॅनलसे जुडे रहे ।\n\n🪷\n0:00 ब्रम्हानन्दं परमसुखदं गुरुगीता श्लोक\n4:40 संसारके द्वंद्व क्या है?\n5:50 विठ्ठला तू वेडा कुंभार\n11:44 तत्वं असि \n🪷\n\nThis video is a profound spiritual discourse by Krishnaji, revealing the divine qualities of the Sadguru through the sacred Guru Gita verse –\n\n“ब्रह्मानन्दं परमसुखदं केवलं ज्ञानमूर्तिं\nद्वंद्वातीतं गगनसदृशं तत्वमस्यादिलक्ष्यम्।\nएकं नित्यं विमलमचलं सर्वधीसाक्षिभूतं\nभावातीतं त्रिगुणरहितं सद्गुरुं तं नमामि॥”\n\nThe Sadguru is the embodiment of supreme bliss, the form of pure knowledge, and beyond all dualities. He leads the seeker beyond the illusions of worldly conflicts, joys and sorrows, guiding them toward the realization of the Supreme Truth.\n\nThe devotional sentiment of “Viththala Tu Veda Kumbhar” reflects this truth – that life’s ups and downs, trials, and gentle taps are the compassionate hands of the Sadguru, shaping us, cleansing our flaws, and guiding the soul to the realization of “Tattvam Asi” – *You are that Supreme Essence*.\n\nThe Sadguru is that divine power who carries the seeker beyond worldly dualities into the eternal bliss of Brahman, where Guru, disciple, and Supreme Consciousness become one.\n\nStay connected with *Sai Leela Rahasya* YouTube channel for more such deeply spiritual and experiential journeys.\n\n#sai #saiBaba #guruGita #spirituality #saiLeelaRahasya #sadguru #krishnaji #devotion #meditation #tattvamasitvameva #bhakti #hinduism #vedicwisdom #spiritualawakening #divineguidance #sanatandharma #saibabaofshirdi #gurublessings #bhaktibhav #innerpeace …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "2,941 views",
    "Likes": "253"
  },
  {
    "Title": "चमत्कार प्रिय भक्त या अज्ञान से पीडित भक्त",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fnFH6LU6Yp0",
    "Transcript": "Let us take up today's topic stories of two devotees One is a devotee attracted to miracles, and the other is drawn purely to devotion. Both stories are found in Chapter 49 of the Sai Satcharita. One is the story of Hari Kanhoba and the other of Kaka Saheb Dixit. One of them is Hari Kanoba, a man fascinated by miracles Having heard from many that Baba performs incredible wonders in Shirdi, he wonders- \"Are these miracles truly real?\" Motivated by this curiosity, he decides to visit Shirdi In contrast stands Kaka Saheb Dixit- a devotee who seeks nothing but pure devotion. This is Chapter 49, which highlights the contrast between these two Now, let us reflect on Hari Kanoba’s story \"Do miracles really happen in Shirdi? Does Sai Baba truly perform miracles?\" This intense curiosity begins to grow deeply in his mind, and one day, with this curiosity he comes to Shirdi. \"Let’s see - do miracles really happen?\" Baba also senses that this man has come just to see a miracle. So, He thinks, “Why not show him one?” Wearing a golden-threaded turban, dressed in fine clothes and a pair of expensive shoes, he arrives in Shirdi You see, when life flows smoothly, that's when the mind begins to indulge in such thoughts \"Let me go see if miracles really happen.\" But when life throws difficulties our way, our mind doesn’t have the luxury to chase such whims. In times of trouble, the only thought is - \"How do I get out of this?\" When the Master keeps someone well - surrounded by comfort and ease - such thoughts begin to trouble the person. They start wondering, “Do miracles really happen?” Hari Kanhoba had everything - wealth, status, luxury. So this playful curiosity bloomed: “Let’s go to Shirdi and see some miracles.\" Even Baba says, “You have no trouble in your life, and that’s why you want to see miracles. So, let Me put you in a little difficulty for a while.” Now look - people think that in this story, Baba showed a miracle. No Baba didn’t show Hari Kanhoba any miracle. But what Baba did was, placed him in a little sorrow and discomfort, for a while. The slippers/shoes he was so deeply attached to - Baba took them away from him. His slippers were stolen. And yes, it is Baba who steals them. I’ll say it just like that because Baba has to show him a miracle now. He took away his precious slippers Even when he removes his slippers, he’s so careful looking for a corner where no one’s eyes will reach, a spot where his slippers will remain safe. But Baba’s eyes do reach there, don't they? Baba’s gaze reaches places no human eye can. But he forgot that the greatest ‘thief’ of all is Baba Himself who once stole butter as Krishna and now chooses to steal illusions as Sai. So, Baba \"steals\" those beloved slippers After having darshan, eating prasad, and observing the crowd bowing down in devotion - he starts thinking, “Maybe miracles do happen here.” But I didn’t experience it. Thinking so, he goes to the spot where he left his slippers to put them back on - he sees, they’re gone. Now, even though he is physically present in Shirdi, his mind is completely elsewhere. Even while having darshan, his thoughts are swirling around the missing slippers. He’s invited to partake in the meal. But even while eating, his mind is towards the slippers “The slippers… they’re gone! Such expensive slippers! Such fine craftsmanship!” and so on. So to bring some clarity, let’s refer to a verse about Hari Kanhoba - Chapter 49, verse 69. 'Jauniya santanchya dara, Pahu aadarile chamatkara, tav jod padatranacha kora, aala ki ghara gharpoch.' And what was Baba doing? Now Baba performs a miracle. He tells a young boy, “Here, take this stick, tie both slippers to it, and walk right between the rows where people are sitting down for their meal. Keep chanting a slogan: ‘Hari ka beta, Jari ka pheta…’ And if someone says, ‘My name is Hari, and those slippers are mine,’ then return them to him.\" So the boy walks around, chanting again and again: ‘Hari ka beta, Jari ka pheta… ' And when Hari sees this, he is stunned “My God! These slippers of mine… they’ve walked all the way to the very place where I’m sitting This is the miracle I had left them in some corner, now they have reached the place where I'm having my meal brought by a child, Baba is saying, ‘Jod padatranacha kora, aala ki ghara gharpoch.’ walked all the way to the place where he was sitting ‘Natari shullak paytan, gelyane kaay mothi nagavan, Pari tadarth manachi vanvan, te sapadlyavin rahina.’ Was it really necessary to create such a scene over a pair of simple slippers? It’s just footwear - if lost, let it go. But no, his entire attention was stuck to those slippers. So, Baba returned them - He did this miracle, making a point. This Leela teaches us something powerful: A person’s mind clings to such petty things only when they are surrounded by comfort and luxury If you place a person in hardship or discomfort, their thoughts no longer run in such directions. Their entire focus shifts to, “Lord, how do I get through this suffering?” It’s like when a speck of dust enters the eye Until it’s removed, you can’t focus on anything else In the same way, when God places a few problems in life, The mind begins to focus, Remembrance deepens, and contemplation begins. But when life is too comfortable, We tend to forget. “Dukh mein sumiran sab kare, sukh mein kare na koye, jo sukh mein sumiran kare, dukh kahe ko hoye.” -Kabir Ji When in sorrow, everyone remembers the Lord. What if they do the same, when in joy? In joy, no one does But if one remembers the Lord even in joy, What sorrow could ever come their way? Kabir ji is clear - Remembering God in sorrow is easy But remembering Him in comfort - that is rare. Even that comfort starts to feel insignificant., and your heart stays connected to the Divine, Then know - you are under His special grace. And there’s one more verse worth reflecting on - Verse 76. Now Baba is speaking to all of us through this… ‘Vishaybhogarth aharnishi, amhi jamlo saipashi, Just like that man was desperate for his slippers, in the same way, we all are desperate for sensory pleasures. ‘Vishaybhogarth aharnishi, amhi jamlo saipashi, Ya amhate dengihi taisi, parmarthiyasi parmarth.’ And for us, Baba then shows such miracles - if someone came just to see a miracle, He showed them exactly that. Our intention in coming to Baba is often to fulfil our desires for sound, touch, form, taste, and smell - the five sense pleasures. So, Baba gives to us just the way we desire for \"Enjoy all five senses, exhaust your life in pleasures, and one day, leave this world empty-handed.” So, as we are gathered to enjoy the sensory pleasures, Then Baba says, that, \"I will give you these worldly pleasures\" Look, when the slippers were stolen, and later returned - the man felt it was a huge miracle. But through this small Leela, Baba is revealing a much deeper truth. What do slippers really symbolize? What is the significance of stealing the slippers? Comforts were taken away, the man was pushed in discomfort The slippers represent comforts. Why do we leave slippers/shoes outside the temple? It’s a message from God: “If you wish to enter into devotion, leave your comforts behind. You cannot carry worldly comforts into devotion and expect your mind to be still.” Only when you leave those behind at the door, can you truly step inside and connect with Me. Just like they say - Two swords cannot stay in one sheath. In the same way, You cannot have both indulgence and inner discipline (Yoga) together. If you seek spiritual growth, you must drop indulgence And if you want indulgence, forget spiritual growth They don't go hand-in-hand You have to sacrifice one of them If you want seek spiritual growth, you must drop indulgence. And if you want indulgence, forget spiritual growth Baba says: “If you truly want My Darshan, you must be ready to sacrifice your comforts You must be strong enough to let go of them.” Only then will you be able to reach me. You cannot reach Me while holding tightly to worldly pleasures. Even in this small story, a profound truth is hidden. ‘Jaha ram waha nahi kaam, ‘Jaha ram waha nahi kaam, jaha kaam waha nahi ram, Tulsi kabhu hot nahi, ravi rajni ek thaam.’ Just as night and day cannot exist together, Similarly, God and indulgence cannot stay in the same heart. ‘Rahiman uljhan aan padi, tedhe dou kaam, Seedhese jag na mile, tedhe mile na ram.’ The mind is torn between two paths If you walk the straight path, you lose worldly pleasures, But you gain Ram If you walk the crooked path, you may gain pleasures, but lose God You must choose one - Either indulge in luxury and desires, or seek God. ‘Rahiman uljhan aan padi, tedhe dou kaam, Seedhese jag na mile, tedhe mile na ram.’ Either you gain the world, or God. You cannot have both. This leela, ‘Hari ka beta, Jari ka pheta’, also holds this deep lesson. He came seeking a miracle - so Baba gave him a miracle. But in this same chapter, there is another Leela - That of Kaka Saheb Dixit. A deep longing awakens in his heart “I must go to Shirdi and have Baba’s Darshan!” An intense longing arose within him… One day, due to some election work, Kaka Saheb Dixit came to Ahmednagar. And once he reached Ahmednagar, he thought, “Shirdi is nearby, let me go and have Baba's darshan.” It was his first darshan of Baba, and the longing was powerful. This deep desire had been stirred by none other than his close friend, Nana Saheb Chandorkar, who had repeatedly told him about Baba. He had planted that seed of devotion: “Please, at least once, take darshan of our Guru. Even the limp in your leg… If Baba wills, it will be healed.” To this, Kaka Saheb replied, “No, that’s not necessary. This entire body is already crippled— Though I may appear physically whole, the real disability is within - my mind is filled with impurities. If your Guru truly has power, then I will ask Him to heal the lameness of my mind. Let my body’s lameness remain.” With such pure intention, he sets out for Baba’s darshan Now look… on one side we saw Hari Kanhoba—longing for miracles. On the other side, here is Kaka Saheb Dixit whose only wish is for the purification of his inner being. He tells Baba: “I have no other request but this.” Now ask yourself - what should our prayer be? Should we be like Hari Kanhoba - craving miracle after miracle, always seeking wonders? Just look around… Today, on social media, every person has a channel, and what are they all doing? Miracle… miracle… miracle… And both the speaker and the listener, I must say, are part of Hari Kanhoba's camp. Only miracles…miracles But in this very same chapter, we’re told about the example of Kaka Saheb Dixit. As he reached Ahmednagar, for the election work he stayed for some time, and coincidentally, there was a horse fair in the town - if someone has to buy one Kaka Saheb Mirikar and few more people, met him there, who had come to see the horses And then, he met Madhavrao Deshpande - Shyama Who had come to Ahmednagar to visit his ailing father-in-law. And thus, the meeting happened Baba’s closest devotee Shyama - of whom it is said: 'Aadhi na gheta Nandi che darshan, Shankar hoil kaay prasanna' If Baba is Shankar, Shyama is Nandi You cannot reach Shankar without Nandi’s Darshan So, such a person- Shyama came to Ahmednagar… Now see what the story is saying, When there is a true, pure longing in your heart, with which you leave to seek Baba's Darshan, like Kaka Saheb Dixit had Baba says, “You don’t even need to reach Shirdi I Myself will come to you on the way.” In the form of Shyama, in the form of a photo, a picture arrives there which had come for some restoration work. So, the repaired photo was kept there, covered for a long time And right in front of Kaka Saheb Dixit, Baba’s photo is revealed. Tears begin to stream from his eyes… This Leela tells us: If your longing is pure, if you truly want the inner crippled-ness to be healed then you don’t need to walk to Baba. He will walk to you. Provided, your intentions are pure. So, Baba himself walked from Shirdi to Ahmednagar What is this Leela telling us? People often ask: “But now Baba is no longer in the body… What do we do?” If your intention is like Kaka Saheb Dixit, You don’t need His physical body No need. But, your inner purity, devotion, and worthiness should be of that high level then you can connect with Baba directly. You don’t need a physical Guru. Now look, the kind of inner disability Kaka Saheb Dixit was going through Kabir Ji has a couplet for it: ‘Dil ka marham na mila, ‘Dil ka marham na mila, jo mila so garji’ In this world, most people who turn to Baba’s devotion do so for their own desires. But the one who truly says, \"My mind is filled with filth, lust, vices, and ignorance - Baba, please remove it from me,\"- that person rarely comes to Shirdi. Even Baba used to say, \"My treasure is overflowing - take as much as you want!\" But not a single person comes for it. Kabir also says the same, ‘Dil ka marham na mila, jo mila so garji, Kahe Kabir aasman phata, kaha tak sive darji’ So, this selfish kind of devotion - again and again, again and again eventually breaks open the sky of ignorance. And then even the Sadguru needs time to repair it. Look at the contrast between Kaka Saheb Dixit and the “Hari ka beta, Zari ka pheta” devotee. One came to Shirdi just to see a miracle, The other came to cleanse the impurities of his own mind. Baba says - \"Those who come with such pure intention don’t even need to come all the way to Shirdi. I Myself will come to them.\" Truly, devotees like Kaka Saheb Dixit are rare perhaps countable on fingers Where Baba rushes to meet His devotee In the form of an image, a person, or in some other. Now the choice is yours Do you want to become like Kaka Saheb Dixit and draw Baba toward you, Or be like Hari Kanhoba, running after miracles all your life and die stuck in that cycle? That is your decision. If you found today’s topic meaningful, Then please - for life remember this one character: Kaka Saheb Dixit. 'Rahude payacha langdepana' 'Nahi maj tyachi vivanchana' \"I don’t care if my leg limps If your Guru is truly powerful, then ask Him to remove the lameness of my mind.\" If we too can say this Then, we don’t need to reach Baba. Baba Himself will come and reside in our hearts, And starts working on us from within. And I say this from personal experience So, instead of Hari Kanhoba, Become like Kaka Saheb Dixit. O Mind-Enchanting One, Remover of Curses and Suffering, Destroyer of Ignorance, Bestower of Liberation, The Supreme Giver of Auspiciousness, Embodiment of Truth, Consciousness, and Bliss, the Sacred Mother of countless embodiments of Sai. the True Form of Sai Himself Victory to the Divine Scripture: Shri Sai Satcharita.",
    "Description": "💫Shri Sai Satcharitra Adhyay 49 (Ovi- 31-66)💫\nIn this profound talk, Krishnaji beautifully contrasts the journeys of two devotees—Kaka Saheb Dixit, a symbol of unwavering faith, and Hari Kanhoba, a seeker of miracles. Through their stories from Sai Satcharita, he reveals how true devotion transcends doubt and how Baba responds differently based on each soul’s inner intent. \nKrishnaji, reflects on the following:\n✨Hari Kanhoba’s missing slippers and their significance.\n✨Why do we forget the Divine in comfort?\n✨What Baba feels for the one who strives to get rid of his/her own ignorance?\n✨The difference between Kaka Saheb Dixit and Hari Kanhoba.\n🙏🏻Om Sai Ram🙏🏻\n\n------------------------\n0:00 Introduction\n1:25 Hari Kanhoba’s Story\n7:27 The Purpose of Pain\n8:20 Is remembrance only for hard times?\n9:10 Sai Grants What the Heart Seeks\n10:30 Significance of the lost slippers\n11:40 Bhog or Yog\n14:29 Kaka Saheb Dixit- Leela\n18:20 Does Baba respond to rituals or to purity of the heart?\n20:14 Selfish Devotion Vs. Self-purification\n23:30 Conclusion\n--------------------------\n\n💫श्री साईं सच्चरित्र अध्याय ४९ (ओवी ३१–६६)💫\nइस गहन प्रवचन में कृष्णाजी दो भक्तों की यात्राओं की सुंदर तुलना करते हैं—काका साहेब दीक्षित, जो अटूट श्रद्धा का प्रतीक हैं, और हरी कन्होबा, जो चमत्कार की तलाश में हैं। साईं सच्चरित्र की इन कथाओं के माध्यम से वह यह उजागर करते हैं कि सच्ची भक्ति संदेह से परे होती है और बाबा प्रत्येक आत्मा की आंतरिक भावना के अनुसार कैसे उत्तर देते हैं।\nकृष्णाजी निम्न विषयों पर मनन करते हैं:\n✨ हरी कन्होबा की खोई हुई चप्पलों और उनके गूढ़ अर्थ पर।\n✨ क्यों हम सुख-सुविधा में परमात्मा को भूल जाते हैं?\n✨ जो व्यक्ति अपने अज्ञान को दूर करने का प्रयास करता है, उसके लिए बाबा की भावना क्या होती है?\n✨ काका साहेब दीक्षित और हरी कन्होबा के बीच का अंतर।\n🙏🏻ॐ साई राम🙏🏻\n\nReferences:\nAdhyay 49, Ovi- 69,70,76\n• दुःख में सुमिरन सब करे सुख में करै न कोय।\nजो सुख में सुमिरन करे दुःख काहे को होय ॥ - संत कबीर\n• जहाँ राम वहाँ नहीं काम, जहाँ काम वहाँ नहीं राम                                                                                               तुलसी कबहूँ होत नहीं, रवि रजनी इक ठाम - गोस्वामी तुलसीदास\n• रहिमन उलझन आन पडी, तेढ़े दोउ काम                                                                                                          सीधेसे जग ना मिले, तेढ़े मिले न राम - संत रहिम\n• दिल का मरहम ना मिला, जो मिला सो गर्जी |                                                                                                         कह कबीर आसमान फटा, क्योंकर सीवे दर्जी || - संत कबीर\n\n\n#sai #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #like #comment #share#explore #fyp #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #values #youtube#zili#shraddha#saburi #newgeneration#peace #saisatcharitra#young #corespirituality #saileelarahasya#viral#saiamritvachan#saiamritwani#krishnaji …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "3,289 views",
    "Likes": "285"
  },
  {
    "Title": "मटका प्यास बुझाये कैसे - भावार्थ",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QpZ_-Uls-cI",
    "Transcript": "So the question now is whether we are prepared to abandon the impermanent. His preparation is complete. He is putting all their effort into it. Look, this is what's special about these songs. When I say this song is equal to the teachings of Sai Satcharita, I'm not just saying it superficially; there's a deep meaning to these songs. How can the clay pot quench thirst? We all know that a clay pot cannot quench the thirst. Imagine a clay pot without water, and I'm sitting with it my whole life. So there's no benefit because the thirst is quenched with the water inside the pot. But it will surprise you to know that we all want to quench our thirst from the pot, not from the water. You will be greatly surprised to know that we are all those crazy ones who, in the pursuit of quenching their thirst from the clay pot, are taking birth and dying in every life, taking birth again, dying again, but still engaged in the same task - trying to quench their thirst from the clay pot. Does the clay pot ever quench the thirst? No, this world, the impermanence of this world, the pleasures of this world, the joys of this world, the enjoyments of this world, they are all like the clay pot. And we want to quench our thirst from the clay pot, but the thirst doesn't quench; it flares up the thirst. Such is the clay pot. So how can the clay pot quench the thirst? Thirst is quenched by water. None of the joys of this world can quench your thirst; they will only inflame it. If you receive a salary of ten thousand, you won't be happy; you'll want fifteen thousand. If the master gives you a girl in your lap, you won't be happy; you'll want a boy. So, this clay pot of the world, it inflames the thirst. Thirst is never quenched, it is inflamed, and we, no matter how many pleasures of this world we have, we want to be content with them, but we never will be. Complete peace, complete contentment, complete joy. Our hands will never touch it because we want to quench our thirst from the clay pot. We have no idea about the water inside the clay pot. Water is the soul, water is spirituality, water is the path to salvation. The water inside the clay pot is the path shown by the guru. That is water. If one drinks that water, then the thirst of many lifetimes will be quenched. But if one only tries to quench their thirst from the clay pot without touching the water, then one may have taken births, may have died many times, but that clay pot never quenched their thirst rather surged it. This world, home, household responsibilities, family, children, joys, festivities, weddings, all these things, no matter what significance they hold, are like clay pots. They are clay pots, and they do not quench the thirst; rather, they inflame it. No matter how many trivial desires of the world are fulfilled, the thirst is not quenched; instead, the thirst flares up. Today, there are so many of us sitting here. Who among us can raise their hand and say that my thirst has been quenched, that there is no lingering thirst in my heart, that there are no unfulfilled desires? If someone raises their hand, I will depart form this spiritual discourse. Raise one hand, for I have no remaining desires. We are all thirsty, and this thirst is not of today; we have carried this thirst through many lifetimes. and reason for this thirst is that we are trying to quench the thirst with clay pot, with household responsibilities, world, people they want to quench this thirst, but it doesn't quench; instead, it flares up and intensifies, leading to attachment. How to quench the clay pot's thirst? Thirst is quenched by water. If Sadguru, out of grace, gives you that water to drink, the water of devotion, the water of knowledge, if he were to give you the nectar to drink, then the thirst of many lifetimes would be quenched in a moment. Otherwise, this thirst does not quench. Do You remember that story of 48th chapter, Sapatnekar? In that chapter sapatnekar's wife sees vision that she goes to well to fill the water And the well's name is Lakkadsha. She goes there to fetch water. Then a fakir comes and says, \"Hey, why are you laboring in vain? Let me fill your pitcher with pure water.\" She runs away from there, afraid that why would this man fill water for her? Today's world is so dangerous that if you go selflessly to help someone, they become afraid, questioning your motives. They wonder, \"Why is this person helping me?\" What selfish interest could he have in it? He would run away. That was exactly what happened to Mrs Sapatnekar. She runs away, thinking, \"Why does this man want to fill my pitcher in the end?\" And Baba says, \"I fill your pitcher with pure water. You are drinking water from Lakkadsha, this world is Lakkadsha. Lakkadsha or Fakkadsha Give it whatever name you want. Those who are drinking water from the well of this world, they have been drinking from birth. They enjoy small pleasures, indulge in minor luxuries, but their thirst is never quenched. So, Baba says, how much longer will these people be ashamed of lifting water from the well, again and again? Come, once, come to my court. I have water with me. Drink it once and see, the thirst of countless lifetimes will be extinguished.\" In Chapter 48, there's this story of Mrs. Sapatnekar who goes to fetch water from the well named Lakkadsha. Baba says, \"This is the well of the world, is Lakkadsha's well.\" Here millions drink water from this well but no one's thirst is quenched Until I give you divine water until i give you pure water with my hands your thirst won't be quenched So come to my court, I have pure water. If I give you that water just once, the thirst of countless lifetimes will be quenched.\" So, here, it's about that water. How can the clay pot quench the thirst? It can only be quenched with water. The inner world will be cleansed, by outward sacrifices. and the inner world is enhanced with the sacrifices of external world like sacrifice of five senses would embellish the inner soul After today, I will tighten the reins on these five senses. After today, I won't indulge in worldly pleasures as will. So, the more sacrifices I make externally, the more the inner soul will shine. That thirst will diminish, the inner world will improve, it will blossom. The more external pleasures you renounce,if the will to eat, drink, roam, wander, and enjoy falls away, then the inner world will surely improve, only then the inner world will only improve. Both these things don't go hand in hand. Enjoying the pleasures of the world and the bliss of the soul. These two cannot be attained together. If one wants to enjoy the world, then the spiritual journey won't be possible. And if Baba is desired, then the indulgence of the world must be forsaken. Here, Baba represents spirituality, and the attachment to the world represents desire. Without forsaking desire, spirituality cannot be attained. But how is our nature? Oh Baba, we are seeking you, aren't we? But along with that, we also want the enjoyment of the world. we are not disagreeing with you. You overlook our devotion. There is no one greater devotee than me then why don't you fulfill my desire so, such devotion won't work. If Baba is desired then world should be dropped and if world is desired then after devoting Baba you are still a penniless our hands won't achieve anything. You won't find two edged swords, it as clear as this. Desire to have devotion to Baba on one hand and on the other desire for world is not possible The enjoyment of the world and spirituality, these two don't go hand in hand. Both paths are separate. One is the path of virtue, the other is the path of desire. These two don't meet. One has to choose If you choose virtue, then you need the strength to sacrifice desire. And if you want to immerse yourself in desire, then you'll have to sacrifice virtue, you'll have to sacrifice Baba. So, how will the thirst of the clay pot be quenched? How will the inner world improve through external sacrifices? The more sacrifices you make externally, the more you stake worldly pleasures, comforts, luxuries, renunciations and sacrifices, the more alert the inner soul will become, it will improve, it will illuminate. The path of Sai is the path of truth, the true path, the real destination of Sai. Keep going, everything will be resolved, every difficulty will be overcome easily, and don't stop, don't falter. If you embark on Baba's path, no matter how much trouble comes, no matter how many hardships you face, no matter how many obstacles arise, don't let go of Baba's embrace. Keep walking, keep walking, keep walking, the destination will soon be in your hands. This is said because that's the path of truth, f you keep walking on these paths, then the difficulty will also be created by Him, and it will also be resolved by Him. So don't stop, keep walking, keep walking, keep walking. Let the broken boat flow with the flow of time. Now look How deep is this line? he one who is sincere in devotion, Baba in his life, what Baba does to the outside world, he breaks it apart, he shatters it, he doesn't let comfort and ease prevail, so let the broken boat flow with the flow of time. I did make your life a broken boat. I made it so that your soul gets disciplined, gets improved, and you become the hero of the entire universe. So this transient world, this transient body, I have made it broken and shattered. so that your internal spiritual world, in reality actually you are hero of the universe, I can establish you there, so I have broken this transience of yours. So let these broken and shattered body, broken and shattered relationships, broken and shattered problems flow with the flow of time, Don't try to recover them, I have broken them. Only a true devotee, a faithful devotee, can understand these lines, otherwise people will think that, oh my God, Baba's worship is going to be like this. I have made your life a broken boat that rocks in the waves and can sink anytime. I have made it like that because it's transient, and as long as you don't let go of this attraction to transience, eternal truth won't touch your hands. That's why I've made your life a broken boat, so it can sink anytime. Let it sink Who, with their whims, has saved the broken boat from the storms? I have created these storms, and who will save you from them going against my will? And remember, I've created these storms so that your attraction to transience, This false body that you're referring to as 'me', should be shattered, so that the real \"I\" can be attained you, like me, despite being a hero of the universe, are living like a beggar. and i cannot look at it. So, I have made your existence into a broken boat and thrown it into the ocean, and let it flow in that stream so that I can protect your soul. You kept saving the body until now and kept destroying the soul, but this time, I have entered your life. This time, I won't let that happen. This time, I will destroy your body but save your soul. This is Baba's promise. So, now the question is that are we too ready to leave transient. He with all His might, is putting all His efforts",
    "Description": "Om Sai Ram 🙏\nIn this soul-stirring talk, Krishnaji takes us beyond melody—into mantra.\nLine by line, stanza by stanza, He unpacks the inner essence of a powerful devotional song ‘Matka Pyas Bujhaye Kaise’. What might seem like poetic praise on the surface transforms—under His guidance—into a deep, meditative exploration of bhakti, surrender, and self-realization.\nKrishnaji doesn’t just explain the words—He reveals the living truth hidden within them.\nWhether you’ve sung this bhajan for years or are hearing it for the first time, this satsang will transform it into an experience. It’s not just about understanding the song… it’s about letting it enter your heart, awaken your devotion, and draw you closer to the Divine.\n🙏 Let every verse become a mirror.\nLet every note become a step inward.\nLet every meaning unfold as darshan.\n\nॐ साई राम 🙏\nइस हृदय को झकझोर देने वाले सत्संग में, कृष्णाजी हमें सुरों से, मंत्र की गहराई तक ले जाते हैं।\nपंक्ति दर पंक्ति, चरण दर चरण, वे एक शक्तिशाली भक्तिगीत ‘मटका प्यास बुझाये कैसे’, के आंतरिक सार को खोलते हैं।\nजो केवल एक काव्यात्मक स्तुति जैसा प्रतीत होता है, वह उनके मार्गदर्शन में एक गहन, ध्यानमय यात्रा बन जाता है—भक्ति, समर्पण और आत्मबोध की।\nकृष्णाजी केवल शब्दों का अर्थ नहीं बताते—\nवे उन शब्दों में छिपी जीवंत सत्यता को प्रकट करते हैं।\nचाहे आपने यह भजन वर्षों से गाया हो या पहली बार सुन रहे हों,\nयह सत्संग उस भजन को एक अनुभव में बदल देगा।\nयह केवल समझने का विषय नहीं—\nबल्कि उसे अपने हृदय में बसाने, अपनी भक्ति को जाग्रत करने, और ईश्वर के और निकट आने का निमंत्रण है।\n🙏हर पंक्ति एक दर्पण बन जाए।\nहर सुर एक अंतर्मुखी कदम।\nहर अर्थ एक दर्शन बन कर प्रकट हो।\n\n#sai #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #like #comment #share#explore #fyp #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #values #youtube#zili#shraddha#saburi #newgeneration#peace #saisatcharitra#young #corespirituality #saileelarahasya#viral#krishnaji #saiamrutwani #saiamritvachan #saileelarahasya …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "4,481 views",
    "Likes": "319"
  },
  {
    "Title": "जैसे को तैसा",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KjGy8ptyHWw",
    "Transcript": "It's a wonderful Leela, Vaman Narvekar versus Captain Hathe. Captain Hathe sends one rupee to Baba from Gwalior, by his friend, and while sending it, he does not tells him what his feelings are. His feeling is that if Baba touches it with his own hands, sanctifies it, and gives it to me, then it will be a great blessing for me. Keeping this sentiment in mind, they give that rupee to their friend's hand, and what the friend feels about giving it to Baba as an offering, so he comes here(Shirdi) and first takes out his rupee and gives it to Baba. So, Baba takes and puts it in his pocket, and as soon as Baba takes rupee from Captain Hate, Baba starts looking at it very carefully. He looks at the rupee from all angles, tosses it, plays with it for a while, and then says, \"With pure sentiment Captain Hate has sent me this rupee, I have understood his sentiment. Go and tell him that I don't need anything from him. There is another stage ahead where Baba has already stopped asking for money, meaning greed has completely vanished there. So, there is no need to take dakshina from such a person. Alright, now this event is witnessed by Vaman Narvekar who is sitting there and he lives near Shirdi. So, the guy feels like there's someone in Gwalior, realizes that if he gets a rupee touched by Baba's hand, if we keep it in our worship abode, wealth will flourish in our house. So, what are we doing sitting here in Shirdi? Why don't we have that much intelligence? So, the guy thinks, \"Yes, I should also give Baba a coin worth one rupee, and how the coin was chosen by him back then, on one side Ram, Lakshman, Sita, and on the other side, Hanuman ji.\" Looking at this act from outside, there is no bigger devotion than this. But Baba knows what's going on in his mind, So, he takes the money and gives it to Shyama and says, \"Give it to Baba.\" Shyama takes it and gives it to Baba. So, Baba picks it up and puts it in his pocket. Then Shyama says, \"No, no, that guy wants the rupee back.\" \"Okay, okay, if he wants it back, no problem. Tell him to Give me 25 rupees in exchange. Then I will return this rupee to him.\" So, the guy doesn't have money with him, maybe 25 rupees was a huge amount back then. So, he still somehow manages to borrow money and gives it to Baba, and then expects even if it's just 25 rupees, but if that rupee gets into my hand, it might provide 25 lakhs after bringing home. So, with this sentiment, he brings even those 25 rupees. Then Shama says, \"Baba, now give him the coin.\" Baba says, \"Even if he settles a heap of money in front of me instead of 25 rupees. Even then, I won't give him this rupee.\" Baba took 25 rupees instead, to pull out the greed within him and didn't return the coin because Baba don't let His devotee get trapped in greed. So, this is Baba and this teaching should come before the world. This is the real Baba, the original Baba, the Baba of Sai Satcharitra, not the idol Baba, but the light. O enchantress, overcomes of bane and calamities, destroyer of ignorance, bestower of deliverance, supreme benefactor, grants truth, conscience and bliss Mother of Sai, Direct form of Sai, Glory to diadem of books Shree Sai sathcharitra",
    "Description": "श्री साई सच्चरित | Captain Hathe & Vaman Narvekar की लीला | Sai Baba’s Divine Leela & Spiritual Teachings\nइस अद्भुत लीला में हम देखते हैं कि कैसे श्री साई बाबा ने भौतिक वस्तुओं से ऊपर उठकर भक्त की भावना और लालच को समझा और हमें गहन आध्यात्मिक शिक्षा दी। Captain Hathe ने एक रुपया बाबा को भेजा, जो बाबा ने गहराई से देखा और समझा कि सच्चा भक्ति भौतिक चीज़ों में नहीं, बल्कि मन की शुद्धता में है। बाबा ने लालच को दूर करने के लिए 25 रुपये मांगकर एक गहरा संदेश दिया — कि भगवान के प्रति भक्ति में लालच का कोई स्थान नहीं।\n\nSpiritual Essence:\nThis divine leela teaches us that Sai Baba transcends material wealth and desires. The true offering is the purity of heart and surrender beyond greed. Baba’s refusal to return the coin without 25 rupees was a divine lesson to break the grip of greed and attachment. This is the real Baba — the eternal light, wisdom, and compassion beyond idol worship.\n\n⏳ Video Timestamps | वीडियो समय-चिह्न\n0:22 — Introduction: Vaman Narvekar vs Captain Hathe’s leela\n0:39 — Captain Hathe’s feelings behind sending one rupee to Baba\n1:08 — The friend arrives in Shirdi and offers the rupee to Baba\n1:14 — Baba examines the rupee carefully with loving attention\n1:39 — Baba’s message: “I don’t need anything from him” — a stage beyond greed\n2:05 — Vaman Narvekar witnesses the event; reflection on true devotion\n2:32 — Another devotee tries to offer a one-rupee coin with Ram, Lakshman, Sita, and Hanuman\n3:06 — Baba perceives the devotee’s inner intentions; passes the coin to Shyama\n3:23 — Devotee wants his rupee back; Baba demands 25 rupees to teach a lesson\n3:42 — Devotee borrows money to pay Baba, hoping for great returns\n4:02 — Baba refuses to return the coin even after receiving 25 rupees — overcoming greed\n4:30 — The true Baba is the light beyond idol worship, the eternal guide\n4:55 — Spiritual praise: remover of ignorance, bestower of bliss and truth\n5:09 — Glory to Shri Sai Satcharitra, the divine scripture#saisatcharitra  #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #like #comment #share#explore #fyp #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #values #youtube#zili#shraddha#saburi #newgeneration#peace #saisatcharitra#young #corespirituality #saileelarahasya#viral #saiamritwani #saileelarahasya#saiamritvachan …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "2,108 views",
    "Likes": "231"
  },
  {
    "Title": "सद्विचार को सत्कर्म बनानेमे देरी ना करें",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TpTgZB2OW10",
    "Transcript": "So, it's up to you whether you want to increase the original treasure or the external rubbish. In the city of Bhiwandi in the Thane district, Mr. Appa Sahib Kulkarni, at his home, Baba appears in the form of a beggar and gives blessings, so his wife gives him one rupee. And he goes out for some work and when he come home and find out that Baba had come in person and his wife gave only one rupee, he say, \"If I were there, I wouldn't have given less than ten rupees, I would have given ten rupees.\" Now, that's a very significant statement to make. He feel that perhaps the beggar might be in the same village, so he goes out to search for him. He search, but they don't find the Fakir. He return home a little disappointed, but by then it's time to eat, so he has his meal. And now he has forgotten about the Fakir, but he has already eaten. In Chapter 32, it says that without a morsel, one should not attempt to grasp the essence of spirituality. So, just as he finish eating, having forgotten about the beggar, he goes for a walk with his companion when suddenly the beggar appears before them. He exclaims, \"Ah, we've found him!\" Then he rushes to offer his respects and gives him one rupee again, forgetting all about the idea of giving ten rupees. 'amhi sagle vagdani tatpar' - we promise something with firm intensity but while implementing it practically we waver So, first he gives one rupee, then Baba says no and asks for more. And one by one he gives one rupee till it becomes nine. Just look at the patience Baba is displaying being a beggar. Even then, Baba is asking, so he says, \"now, I only have a ten rupee note,\" here he is just saying without the willingness to give. He's saying, \"I only have a ten rupee note,\" but Baba persists and says, \"Alright, fine,\" and hand over the note and take back nine rupees.\" So, He gives nine rupees and keeps the ten rupee note, fulfilling his earlier statement that if he was there, he would give ten rupees. Baba has completed that. So Baba here is saying when there is goodwill in the heart, Once a thought arises and if a gap is given even for a second to act on it, then Maya will carry away that thought.\" if some emotion erupts, suppose you went to a hospital to visit some patient and and you got to know that they are going through some financial clutches A thought came that since I have money, let me just donate fifty thousand. That thought arose, but in that moment, some other work came up. And once a thought comes, if you have the strength to gpay it, then let it happen immediately. If the thought comes and you have the capability to donate fifty thousand, it should be debited from your account instantly. But if the thought comes and even if you delay it for five minutes, you won't be able to donate fifty thousand. Did you understand this from kulkarni's leela which teaches that when a good resolution forms in mind, one should not delay for a second to do it and if a wrong thought forms, one should wait for sometime. Your life will change completely \"When a good thought comes to you, there shouldn't be even a second's delay, and when a wrong thought arises, you should postpone it, saying 'Not now, later.\" So deep is the Leela of Kulkarni that if the thought comes that i would give ten rupees then just give it. In reality, if something is slipping through the hand it's nothing but pure, nothing but welfare. Let go of what slips through your hands. The more slips away, the more the treasure inside grows. And the more you accumulate external rubbish, in millions of rupees, the original treasure inside will diminish. So, it's up to you whether you want to increase the original treasure or the external rubbish. Now, this decision is yours. O enchantress, overcomes of bane and calamities, destroyer of ignorance, bestower of deliverance, supreme benefactor, grants truth, conscience and bliss Mother of Sai, Direct form of Sai, Glory to diadem of books Shree Sai sathcharitra",
    "Description": "यह वीडियो साईसत्चरित्र में वर्णित अण्णासाहेब कुलकर्णी की लीला का आध्यात्मिक संदेश प्रस्तुत करता है। इस लीला में बाबा यह सिखाते हैं कि “सद्विचार जब मन में आए, तो उसे तुरंत सत्कर्म में परिवर्तित करना ही सच्ची भक्ति है।”\n\nजब हम किसी अच्छे कार्य का विचार करते हैं, वह केवल मन में रुकना नहीं चाहिए, बल्कि कर्म में उतरना चाहिए, तभी वह ईश्वरीय प्रेरणा बनता है। इसी प्रकार, किसी गलत कर्म को करने से पहले पाँच मिनट का विराम हमारे अंतःकरण को जागृत कर सकता है और जीवन को नई दिशा दे सकता है।\n\nयह कथा केवल एक घटना नहीं, बल्कि यह स्मरण दिलाती है कि भगवान सदैव हमें सद्विचार प्रदान करते हैं, और उन पर तुरंत अमल करना ही सच्चा साधक बनाता है।\n\n🪷\n0:00 – अण्णासाहेब कुलकर्णी लीला (*साईसत्चरित्र*)\n3:08 – सद्विचार को सत्कर्म में बदलने का महत्व\n4:36 – गलत कर्म से पहले पाँच मिनट रुकने का फायदा\n5:03 – लीला का रहस्य\n🪷\n\nThis divine video unfolds the spiritual essence of Annasaheb Kulkarni’s Leela from the Sai Satcharitra. Baba’s subtle message is clear—“When a noble thought arises in your mind, turn it into a good deed immediately. That is true devotion.”\n\nA good thought is not just a fleeting idea; it is a divine spark that must manifest in action to bear fruit. Likewise, pausing for five minutes before committing a wrong action can awaken the conscience and change the course of life.\n\nThis Leela reminds us that God constantly blesses us with sacred thoughts, and acting upon them without delay is the path of a true seeker.\n\n#saileelarahasya #saisatcharitra #goodthoughts #gooddeeds #saiwisdom #spiritualpath #devotion #saiquotes #lifechanging …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji, good thought, good deeds, life lessons from sai baba",
    "Views": "2,170 views",
    "Likes": "221"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साईबाबा कैसे एक स्वार्थी को परमार्थी बनाते है ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lr8x6cR4658",
    "Transcript": "These things come from experience. They won't come from reading books. They won't come. Meaning, I'm telling you prophecy. If there is excessive greed in your lives, and if you have boundless love for Baba, if these two conditions are fulfilling for you, then these handcuffs and these barriers will come into your life, today or tomorrow. Now, I'll share a story, a Madrasi bhajan gathering, a very important story, a very profound one. Perhaps after I speak, things will become clearer. Look, a bhajan mela comes from Madras, which include a man, three women, the man, his wife, his sister-in-law, and his daughter. These four people actually set out from Madras to go to Kashi, but in the middle, they hear something that there's a saint in Shirdi who distributes money himself. Didn't I tell you about the time, the morning time, the distribution of money? It had become so prevalent that it shook the entire Madras region. Imagine, how much charity He must have been giving in those days, you estimate, the word had spread to Madras. That's why even today, many people from our South come, so I am also one in the Madrasi bhajan gathering. So they found out that here in Shirdi, a lot of money is distributed by the saint of Shirdi, so we should also go there. And then if we go there and sing few bhajans, who knows, we might become rich, our lifelong earnings might happen. With this sentiment, those four people come to Shirdi. Out of those four, the man's wife, in one era, was so devoted to Lord Rama that time to time, she used to have direct visions of Lord Rama. With this sentiment, those four people come to Shirdi. Out of those four, the man's wife, in one era, was so devoted to Lord Rama that time to time, she used to have direct visions of Lord Rama. But, as they say, greed is a dangerous thing. She is trapped by greed for money and the visions happening to her eventually are lost Then the time comes when she is deprived of those visions. Then, finding those visions becomes rare. Now, she has reached a state where, in one era, she was such a great authority that her devotion was so sincere that she had frequent visions of Lord Rama. But greed crept into her heart, causing her to lose sight of Rama. And such people come to Shirdi. So, first of all, when Baba's gaze falls on her during the aarti, whose eyes used to have continuous visions of Lord Rama, Baba's heart melts, and Baba washes away the greed inside her, and once again grants her the vision of Rama. The connection that was cut off from there is then reestablished. He gives her the life she once had authority over. Okay, so that's about the wife, and the wife goes and tells her husband that, \"That saint I met, I went there to have his darshan, but I ended up having the vision of Lord Rama there.\" Now, this husband is a extremely miser, greedy, and completely obsessed with money. He says, \"These women are very naive. she might have even seen Lord Rama in her naivety. So what's the big deal about it?\" And what happened after seeing Lord Rama? Did Lord Rama give you some money? If he gave you 5-10 crore, then I might believe that you had Lord Rama's vision. And if he didn't give you anything, then why are you so happy about your vision? Ignorance speaks such nonsense. So he says, \"I don't believe that you saw Lord Rama.\" So Baba says, \"Okay, let's bring this person to his senses.\" If the wife was brought, then husband too has to be brought otherwise, the poor woman will have to suffer her whole life. So, Baba feels compassion for him and gives him two dreams. In the first dream, he sees himself in chains, and he is in jail, and Baba is standing in front of him, tied up Madrasi looks at Baba and cries, saying, \"Baba, what has become of my condition? What karma am I facing the consequences of?\" So Baba says, \"No, but you have to suffer the consequences of the karma you have done. He says,\"I have not done anything misdeed in this birth of which i m suffering\" \"If you haven't done anything in this life, then you must have done something in your past life.\" So he says, \"Baba, I don't know what I did in my past life.\" I am taking your assurance for a moment, that I must have made mistakes in my past life. But in front of you, the hero of the universe, and I am having your darshan (sight). So all my past deeds, like dry grass burning to ashes, should have been reduced to ashes by now. Baba says, \"Wow, you said such a big thing. Do you really have so much faith?\" Baba asks him. So he says, \"Baba, I have complete faith.\" Baba says, \"Okay, close your eyes\" When he closes his eyes, a sound of something falling is heard. When he opens his eyes, the police officer who was standing outside has fallen to the ground, soaked in blood, and Baba is standing there laughing. What a wonder! After closing his eyes, then this play happened here. \"Baba, what is this?\". So, Baba says, 'Okay, now you're trapped completely.\" And above all, when that police officer fell, his hand was open. Look, watch the game, when that police officer was alive, his hands were tied. Look, then he said, 'Now that your hand is free, now it will be fully believed that you are the one who killed him.' \"Now, there's no hope for you,\" So The man says, \"Baba, I am completely surrendered to you, and right now, no one else can save me from this trouble except you, Baba.\" So Baba says, \"Close your eyes again\". When he closes them Now Baba says, \"Open your eyes\" and he finds himself completely free from both the jail and the chains standing in front of Baba, and Baba asks him a question, 'In your previous greeting, you came to me after hearing about my fame from Madras, and you used to come daily to worship me. What is the difference between that greeting and the one you are doing now?' Baba is asking him a question, and the man says, 'Baba, there is a difference between the earth and the sky. Look, Baba brought about the transformation. 'The difference between the earth and the sky is that earlier I used to come to you addressing you as a fakir who distributes a lot of money and I used to spread in front of you along with the greed.' But now, considering you as the complete Supreme, I have made myself selfless\". So, this is the story, but what is the depth of it? First of all, see, the hands are tied, now the one whose hands are tied, what is the need for him of any bars, you can throw him anywhere, he won't be able to do anything, but still there are bars, so they say ignorance is of two types, one is Avidya and one is Maya. Avidya falls on the individual soul, and Maya falls on Shiva. Adhyaya 27, the designation of Avidya which is within me is called Jiva and the designation of Maya is Shiva, so the one who is bound by chains is Avidya and the bars are Maya, and this Avidya is individual ignorance and Maya is collective ignorance. I won't go into this more because then I'll have to bring the complete fiftieth chapter. I understand that you might not have complete clarity on this, just in order for me to explain these two words to you, I will need to explain two chapters. for a time being just understand that Avidya is individual ignorance and Maya is collective ignorance. so Baba frees him from both type of ignorance. what is the depth of this leela ? A man filled with greed from all around the world has come to Baba's court, and Baba wants to extract the greed within him. Baba is telling through this play that He creates such a crisis in his life that his entire attention is diverted to that crisis. Money and pleasure will fall, and his entire attention will come on that crisis. He won't shake or sway, I make his situation such. I turn him into bird with trimmed wings. I fill him with so much pain that his entire attention will go to the pain. The tendency to earn money and indulge will fade away on its own. You've got a fever and delicious dishes are made at home, will you be able to eat them? you won't be able to eat them even if you want to. Even if you have food placed in front of you, you won't be able to eat it, but if you are healthy, you'll eat four servings more This is just the point, then He puts him in so much trouble that his entire attention goes to that trouble. Then earning money and indulging will start falling on their own. This is an experience. These things come from experience, not from reading books. I am telling you a prophecy, if there is more greed than laughter in people's lives and if you love Baba endlessly. If these two conditions are being fulfilled by you, then this hatchet and these bars will come today, if not today, then tomorrow, because there is no other way. To end the tendency of indulgence, to kill desire, they put so much pain that the entire attention goes to the pains. Earning money, indulging, there is no time for that. Alright, now it has come to this, so Baba says close your eyes and the police fall with a thud. Baba realizes, after giving so much trouble, but still, his attention is not coming towards this side, lets increase the degree a bit, increase the degree a bit more, then the police was fallen. It means so much trouble that a murder case will come up today. By giving such excruciating torment, some people are freed from greed And look, by giving two dreams that is by giving so much trouble, increasing the degree by killing the police and there is another meaning of killing the police, that our entire intelligence, even intelligence falls when one wants to reach perfection, then intelligence also has to fall, that is also its separate dimension. We'll have to come back to the fiftieth chapter. But I'm not going into that, I'm just trying to simplify as much as I can. That He increases the pain and from our greed habit, the greed for money, the greed for comfort, the greed for enjoyment, this indulgence, if Baba wants to remove it, then Baba has no other option, but not everyone will go through this, first listen carefully with whom he does this, I also tell you those who want to do selfless devotion to Baba but the desire is not decreasing, there is a lot of difference between wanting and desire not decreasing, so such a person's life has these leelas, so if someone is passing through these dramas here, then what am I saying, he must know very well because this doesn't come from reading, it comes from experience, These are not the things told by reading books, this is experience and still, his greed is not diminishing, let's increase the degree a bit more and increase it a bit more, and a bit more, and increase it so much that he doesn't even realize when his greed fell and Baba knows very well which desire, if the lust is too much, then how to remove it, that is also there in Sai Satcharitra, if someone is too greedy, then there are processes of how it troubles, it will only come to you after passing through that path, so this is Baba and this teaching should come before the world, this is the real Baba, this is the original Baba, this is the Baba of Sai Satcharitra, not the idol Baba, this is the light, so an attempt has been made to tell this in the context of the Madrasi Bhajan Mela, that if a person is trapped in greed beyond the limit, then the only way to remove him is to increase his troubles, and see if he still can't detach from greed, if he still can't fall outside greed. Then increase the degree of troubles But the day it seems that this disease of greed inside has come out, Baba says I won't take anything from you, and there is no reason left now to give you any penance. Now, the blissful form of Sat-Chit-Anand, which is immortal, will keep drinking every moment, whether you remain in this body or leave it, but from this bliss, you will never be cut off. That is the real wealth, the real elixir. That's the goal of life. He takes one to that level, I don't know how you people have imagined this, but this is the reality, In this way, the Madrasi Bhajan Mela, Baba completely transformed a greedy individual forever He came to Baba's court with complete greed, but Baba doesn't give him money, just two rupees, filled with faith and patience. And from this, there's no greater treasure. And later, when that person goes on a journey, Baba says, \"Mi tula paise dehin, mast,\" meaning, \"I will give you money wherever you need it, so I'll be there for you because I've cleaned all the greed inside you. I know you'll need money until your last breath. Money is necessary for transactions, but it shouldn't be transformed into greed. Wherever you need it, I'll help without you asking. My invisible hand will keep giving you. So, You don't need to ask for anything separately.\" This way, their entire journey goes very smoothly in the story There's a couplet by Kabir Ji, it's a very profound couplet. I don't know how many people will understand this couplet, Kabir Ji, has a great impact on me, and Kabir Ji's words are as famous as mine for speaking bitter truths. Kabir Ji says, \"Just as a boat is laden with water in a river, wealth accumulates within a house., with both hands expelling out, this is the wise way.\" Perhaps many people won't understand the meaning of this couplet. Now, look, a man is traveling in a boat, that's fine. And if there's a hole in the boat, water starts entering. So the more water enters, the greater the danger of the boat sinking, that's true, isn't it? That's why it's said, as water increases in the boat, you feel the danger. Similarly, if money starts increasing beyond limit in the house, then the alarm bell is ringing. Understand this. If you don't clap at the right time, then there won't be any fun. It's such an immortal saying, just as a boat laden with water in a river, so wealth in a house, consider it as dangerous as water in a boat both will drown you If water rises in the boat, you quickly start throwing water out. Similarly, if money comes in, don't hoard it, that's the wise thing to do.",
    "Description": "श्री साईं सच्चरित्र – अध्याय २९ | मद्रासी भजन मंडली की लीला\n\nइस अध्याय में वर्णित है एक भजन मंडली की कथा, जो काशी जाने के उद्देश्य से यात्रा पर निकलती है, लेकिन रास्ते में यह सुनकर कि शिरडी के साईं बाबा भक्तों को बहुत धन देते हैं, उनके मन में लोभ उत्पन्न हो जाता है। परिणामस्वरूप, वे काशी न जाकर शिरडी में ही रुक जाते हैं।\n\nलेकिन इस लीला में साईं बाबा एक गहरे आध्यात्मिक संदेश को उजागर करते हैं — कैसे एक लोभी हृदय को, बाबा अपने प्रेम और अनुभवों की अग्नि में तपाकर लोभ से मुक्त कर देते हैं, और उसे श्रद्धा व सबूरी के अमूल्य धन से भर देते हैं।\n\n🔹 जब किसी के भीतर लोभ अत्यधिक बढ़ जाता है, तो बाबा किस प्रकार उसे जीवन की कठिनाइयों और मानसिक पीड़ा के माध्यम से शुद्ध करते हैं?\n🔹 बाबा किन साधकों को इस प्रकार के अनुभवों से गुज़ारते हैं और क्यों?\n🔹 भोगवृत्ति से मुक्त करने के लिए साईं किस तरह की लीला रचते हैं?\n\nयह लीला केवल एक भजन मंडली की यात्रा नहीं, बल्कि आध्यात्मिक रूपांतरण की वह प्रक्रिया है, जिसमें बाबा हमारे भीतर की वासनाओं को जला कर, अंतर को शुद्ध करते हैं।\n\nयह प्रसंग उन सभी के लिए अत्यंत महत्वपूर्ण है जो बाबा से केवल भौतिक लाभ नहीं, बल्कि अंतरिक शांति, ज्ञान और आत्मिक विकास की आकांक्षा रखते हैं।\n\n\nShri Sai Satcharitra – Chapter 29 | The Leela of the Madrasi Bhajan Mandali\n\nThis chapter narrates the story of a Bhajan Mandali (devotional singing group) that sets out on a pilgrimage to Kashi. However, on their way, they hear that Sai Baba of Shirdi generously distributes money to devotees. Tempted by this, they decide to change course and stay in Shirdi instead.\n\nBut beneath this simple story lies a profound spiritual message.\n\nSai Baba, through His divine leela, transforms a heart filled with greed by putting it through the fire of experience — ultimately freeing it from worldly desires and filling it with the eternal wealth of Shraddha (faith) and Saburi (patience).\n\n🔹 When greed overwhelms a person’s heart, how does Baba use life’s trials and inner suffering as a tool for purification?\n🔹 Who are the individuals Baba puts through such intense inner experiences — and why?\n🔹 What spiritual methods does Baba use to destroy the tendency for sensual indulgence and attachment?\n\nThis leela is not merely about a detour on a pilgrimage — it is a powerful depiction of spiritual transformation, where Baba burns away inner impurities and liberates the soul from material craving.\n\nThis episode holds deep meaning for all those who seek not just material blessings from Sai Baba, but also true peace, inner wisdom, and spiritual evolution.\n\n\n#saileelarahasya#corespirituality#newgeneration#young#viral#genz #explore #jaisai #peace #youtube #spiritualism #zili #omsairam #saibaba #shirdi#shirdisaibabamessage …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "5,219 views",
    "Likes": "373"
  },
  {
    "Title": "शिरडी मे 3 रात रुकने का महत्व !!!",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sdkXcFshLMQ",
    "Transcript": "इसीलिए तीन दिन मिनिमम तीन दिन जब भी आते हैं तो तीन रात निकालने का प्रयास कीजिए और एक बहुत इंपोर्टेंट रीजन बताता हूं कि किसी सदगुरु के दरबार में तीन रात क्यों निकालनी चाहिए [संगीत] [संगीत] आज का नवा [संगीत] परिकम न का संकल्प याया था कि किसी तरह से शुरू हो जाए और कोई परिक्रमा एक नंबर से शुरू होती है की इतना तो करेंगे द संकल्प वो भावना से हमने शुरू की थी और नवा परिक्रमा है और उसका मकसद य बिल्कुल नहीं होता कि न प थम जाए वहां पर वो खत्म हो जाए बल्कि हकीकत में वहां से वास्तविक जनी शुरू होती है जो लोग य नौ परिक्रमा में मतलब भाग लिए है न परिक्रमा में हमारा एक भी परिक्रमा छूटना नहीं चाहिए य स से जाने कितनी मुश्किलो का सामना करके क्योंकि बहुत लोगों के बारे में तो मैं खुद जानता हूं कितने संघर्ष के बाद एक परिक्रमा को कंटिन्यू कर सके व पूरा कर सके और तब जाके नना पूरा हुआ है तो मेरी एक गुजारिश है य पर खम नहीं होना चाहिए जब भी आप शिरडी आए समाधि मंदिर का दर्शन जितना इंपोर्टेंट है लेकिन साधना और तपस्या के लिए परिक्रमा भी उतनी ही इंपोर्टेंट है कम से कम जो लोग मुझे सुन लिए हैं जो लोग मुझे सुन चुके हैं उनको तो ये बात का एहसास हो गया होगा कि तपस्या का महत्व कितना ज्यादा है तो क्या करेंगे तीन ही चीज तो श भी आके कर सकते हैं तपस्या के तौर प एक तो दर्शन और दूसरा चरित्र का पारायण और तीसरा परिक्रमा तो ये तीन चीजें अगर आने के बाद अगर हम नहीं करते हैं तो सच मायने में वो दर्शन अधूरा है मैं फिर रिपीट कर रहा हूं सबसे पहले दर्शन और दूसरा पारायण हो सके तो मेरी गुजारिश हमेशा याद रखना जो लोग शिर आते हैं आज सुबह आया दर्शन किया के निकल गए प्लीज वैसा मत कीजिए अगर आपको पूरा फायदा उठाना है बाबा का शिरडी का तो तीन रात यहां पर रुके मिनिमम कम से कम तीन रात और तीन रातों में तीन दिन का परिक्रमा होना ही चा और हर एक दिन तीन तीन अध्याय होना ही [संगीत] चाहिए अगर शिरडी आना ही है तो यह भावना से आइए भले ही साल में दो बार आइए लेकिन तीन दिन की छुट्टी लेकर के आइए सुबह आए और शाम को निकल गए बंबई वालो को ये बहुत बड़ी बीमारी है नजदीक पड़ता है रात में जर्नी शुरू किया सुबह उतरे 12 बजे के अंदर निपटा लिया फिर वापस 12 बजे जो बस रात को बहुत सुविधा जनक बना लिया हम लोगों ने लेकिन सच बोल ऐसा कितने साल भी करेंगे उसका मजा नहीं है अरे कितनी छुट्टिया बर्बाद करते हैं फलत चीजों में लेकिन थोड़ा छटिया बचा के रखो बाबा के तो तीन रात अच्छा तीन रात ही क्यों न रात शिर में निकालनी चाहिए तीन रात क्यों बिताना चाहिए शर में तीन रात भी क्यों बिताना चाहिए क्योंकि रातों में हम नींद करते हैं सोते हैं और सोने में हमारा अहंकार बहुत पतला हो गया होता है अगर बाबा को हमने कोई संस्कार अगर उलना है तो बड़ी आसानी से उेल पाते हैं हमारा अहंकार बीच में नहीं आता तो सबसे पहले वो रीजन है कि तीन रातो की नींद इस पावन भूमि पर होनी चाहिए अगर तीन रातों की नींद य पर हम कर पाते हैं लेकिन वो रातो की नींद होने के लिए भी दिन पूरा ब के स्मरण में बीतना चाहिए कम से कम तीन अध्याय एक दिन में और परिक्रमा मौन रख कर के जैसा अभी कर रहे हैं जो लोग मुझे सुन रहे हैं जो लोग न महीने से परिक्रमा किए हैं वो जब भी आए तो उनका य तीन दिन का नियम होना चाहिए एक दिन भी परिक्रमा मिस नहीं होगा एक दिन भी तीन अध्याय मिस नहीं होंगे भले ही दर्शन एक बार करेंगे लेकिन यह उपासना यह तपस्या य नहीं छोड़ेंगे वैसे भी कहते हैं कि दर्शन होना चाहिए पलबर का दर्शन होना चाहिए पलर का लेकिन उनकी मर्जी उनका हुकम की तामीर होनी चाहिए हर पल का मैं फिर रिपीट करता हूं दर्शन होना चाहिए पल भर का लेकिन बाबा का जो मर्जी है बाबा का जो हुकम है बाबा जो हमसे अपेक्षा करते हैं उसकी तामील होनी चाहिए हर पल का पल पल सचेत रह कर के उसकी उनके हुकम की तामील होनी चाहिए तो इस तरह से अगर शिरडी आना ही है तो इस तरह से आएंगे नहीं तो रात को निकले सुबह उतरे दोपहर तक निपटा लिया और फिर वापस चल दिए ठीक है का जीवन है लेकिन हमारी व्यस्तता है ना जब बाबा के पास आते हैं तभी व्यस्तता रहती है लेकिन संसार के मौ मज के लिए छुट्टिया र्च करते हैं उसके बारे में हम बात नहीं [संगीत] करते छुट्टिया तो सबके पास उतनी ही होती है लेकिन कौन कहा लगा रहा है उसका महत्व है एक तो ड्यूटी को पूरी ईमानदारी से निभाना बस हमेशा खुश रखना क्योंकि वो कर्मयोग है आठ घंटा हम लोग वहां पर काम करते हैं जितना मेहनत से काम करेंगे वो बॉस के लिए व ऑर्गनाइजेशन के लिए वो कंपनी के लिए उतना चि की शुद्धि लेकर के वो आ घंटे के बाद घर प आएंगे और वो शुद्ध चि से जब भगवान के ध्यान में बैठेंगे तो ध्यान लगेगा तो जितनी ईमानदारी से हर जगह काम करेंगे उतना मन लगेगा बाबा में और अगर काम की चोरी की चालाकी की आग चुरा लिया तो फिर शाम में आकर के वो अध्याय में मन नहीं लगेगा शाम के एक अध्याय में अगर मन लगना है तो दिन का ड्यूटी जो कर्म क्षेत्र है हमारा वो बहुत ईमानदारी से वहा पर मेहनत करनी होगी ताके शाम को व एक घंटा बाबा को मैं पूरी शिद्दत के साथ दे सकू जब मैं ग्रंथ लेकर बैठूंगा बहुत छोटी छोटी बातें है और छुट्टिया जहा तक है जितना बचाएंगे बाबा के लिए खर्च करेंगे वो छुट्टियों का मोल है लेकिन अगर वो छुटिया बाबा र्च ना करते हुए म मस्ती में खर्च करेंगे तो उसका कोई मोल नहीं है लेकिन हम लोग है ना सारी चटिया म मस्ती में तो र्च कर देते हैं लेकिन जब बाबा खर्च करने का समय आता है तो हमारे पास छुट्टिया होती नहीं है इसीलिए तीन दिन मिनिमम तीन दिन जब भी आते तो तीन रात निकालने का प्रयास कीजिए और एक बहुत पोर्टेंट रीजन बताता हूं कि किसी सतगुरु के दरबार में तीन रात क्यों निकालनी चाहिए उसका वजह ये है कि जैसे बाबा को तीन रातो की समाध मिली थी हम सबका भी मंजिल वही है हम सबको भी एक दिन वो तीन रातो के समाधि तक पहुच है इसीलिए अभी से आदत डालने का कि तीन रात मैं बाबा आपके चौकट प आकर के मैं पड़ा रहूंगा ताकि किसी दिन साधना करते करते उपासना करते करते आपकी मर्जी को समझ करके वैसा जीवन जीते जीते जीते जीते जीते एक दिन कुछ सालों के बाद कुछ जन्मों के बाद सही लेकिन आप ही की तरह मैं भी तीन दिन की समाधि ले सक तो इसीलिए तीन रातो का इंपॉर्टेंस है कोई भी दिव्य क्षेत्र में पुण्य क्षेत्र में तीर्थ क्षेत्र में तीन रात बितानी चाहिए कहते हैं वो इसलिए तो मेरी गुजारिश है जो लोग न महीने से परिक्रमा कर रहे हैं आज तो य आखरी परिक्रमा है लेकिन मेरी आप सबसे गुजारिश है जब भी आएंगे जब भी आएंगे ये अराम चलना चाहिए ये किसी एक दिन का नहीं है ये तो न महीने हमने गिन लिए अ अ गिनती खत्म अब जब भी आएंगे तो परिक्रमा मिस नहीं होनी चाहिए न महीने तक तो ये गिनती खत्म हो गई गिनती तो शुरुआत में एक संकल्प हम लोग कर लेते हैं साधारण सा लेकिन हकीकत में बोलते हैं ना वो तो ट्रेलर था अब पिक्चर बाकी है अभी तो डेली होनी चाहिए जब भी आते हैं क्योंकि वो चार घंटे वो तीन घंटे आप बाबा को दे रहे हैं मन में रह करके बाबा का नाम लेते हुए आप चल रहे हैं आप बैठ के न घंटा नाम लेके बताइए नहीं ले पाए आप लाख कोशिश करके दे आप नहीं ले पाएंगे लेकिन वही बाबा का चिंतन करते हुए स्मरण करते हुए नाम लेते हुए आप तीन घंटा आराम से बिता पाएंगे तो तीन घंटा बाबा को नाम स्मरण करने के लिए चलना है परिक्रमा में मौन रख करके तो मेरी गुजारिश है जब भी आए शिरडी तो परिक्रमा ना छूटे पारायण ना छूटे और मौन र कर के मतलब परिक्रमा हो और मैंने बताया है हकीकत में परिक्रमा क्या होती है ये तो स्थूल परिक्रमा है हम लोग जो कर रहे हैं लेकिन स्थूल से सूक्ष्म तक पहुच मंजिल तो सक्षम परिक्रमा है सक्षम परिक्रमा का मतलब य है कि मैं संसार का हर व्यवहार करता र एक आम आदमी ही की तरह लेकिन मेरा चित पूरा बाबा केंद्रित रहे 2 घंटे सब काम करते हुए भी कबीर जी कहते हैं भीख फकीरी सीखनी है तो पनिहार से सीख भीख फकीरी सीखनी पनिहार से सीख बात करे सखियान से ध्यान गगर के [संगीत] बीच मतलब पहार होती है ना जो दूर दराज इलाको से पानी भर के लाती है दो दो तीन तीन गड़े अपने सर पर रख कर के जब सहेलियों के साथ पानी भर के आ रही होती है तो रास्ते भर में अपने सखियों से हर तरह की बात करती है बती है हर तरह सब्जेक्ट पर उनकी चर्चा होती है मेरी सास ऐसी है मेरी सास वैसी है तुम्हारी सास कैसी है हर तरह का सब्जेक्ट पर बात करते हैं लेकिन एक पल के लिए भी ध्यान गगर से उतरता नहीं [संगीत] है वैसे ही कबीर जी बोलते हैं कि संसार का हर कर्तव्य निभाते रहो लेकिन चित में बाबा बसे रहे वो है वास्तविक परिक्रमा लेकिन वो भी बता द है वात परिक्रमा लेकिन आज ये स्ल परिक्रमा करते जाएंगे तो एकन सक्षम परिक्रमा तक पहुंच सब कार्य कलाप करते हुए सब कर्तव्य को निभाते हुए हम लोग वो परिक्रमा को पूरी कर पाएंगे हम लोग बाबा का स्मरण रख पाएंगे सब जिद े हु लेकिन बाबा का ध्यान जो है वह अविराम चलता रहे तो यह है वास्तविक परिक्रमा तो आज प्लीज मे को कितने लोग वादा करते हैं जब भी आएंगे पारायण नहीं छूटेगा और परिक्रमा नहीं छूटेगा हाथ उठाइए प्लीज जब भी आएंगे बहुत बहुत शुक्रिया मनो हारिणी शाप ताप निवारनी अज्ञान नाशिनी मोक्ष दाहिनी परम कल्याण काणी सत चित आनंद प्रधानी अनंत कोटि साईं नाथों की जननी साक्षात साईं स्वरूपिणी ग्रंथ राज श्री साईं स चरित दिव्य ग्रंथ की जय",
    "Description": "शिरडी मे 3 रात रुकने का महत्व !!!\n#sai #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #like #comment #share#explore #fyp #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #values #youtube#zili#shraddha#saburi #newgeneration#peace #saisatcharitra#young #corespirituality #saileelarahasya#viral …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "2,348 views",
    "Likes": "235"
  },
  {
    "Title": "शिरडी तुम्हारे अंदर है (भावार्थ) / Shirdi Tumhare Andar hai ( Spiritual Meaning )",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kUB7-VnMZQQ",
    "Transcript": "Shirdi is within you, if you look inside your heart, you'll find it. This song, the task that Baba has assigned to me, to convey to you all, this song completely expresses it. Each verse illuminates the depths. Today, I will take this song in its entirety so that I can convey to you all what I want to say, what I want to give you all. It will be very clear, understandable. This song is being sung about Baba's deep layers, which we have not yet touched, where we have not yet reached. We, just by obtaining a drop of it, consider ourselves great. We have just touched a drop, and Baba is saying, the entire ocean is remaining to be known. The entire ocean, and what we have touched is just a drop. Now understanding the entire ocean remains, right now we've just touched a drop. So, Baba has placed me among you all to deliver this message, and if indeed you wish to understand the depth of the ocean, then one must dive into the heart and soul of Baba- Sai Satcharitra, the depth of each of its leelas, and to learn the lesson hidden within those leelas, to grasp his advice, must be imbibed within hearts, understand, and it's not just about understanding, but molding one's life according to it. Then the ocean Baba is talking about, that conquering the entire ocean is still pending. You, having merely attained a drop, sit feeling blessed, then the entire sea is yet to be conquered, the entire ocean is still pending. In reality, we don't even realize the essence of this, that we've only touched a drop, just a droplet, and it's from that droplet that we have become so intoxicated that we aren't even aware of the ocean. And everyone is admiring the drop. Feeling proud that I've found Baba. And Baba in return is saying, 'You've only touched a drop. You've touched a droplet, and you're feeling proud that you've known me, you've found me. But the entire ocean is still ahead.’ See, I always say one thing, my words might seem bitter to you, but it is reality, whether you like it or not, you will have to listen, but the one who is honest, who has the true devotion to Baba, will understand this depth, will increase the thirst to drink the ocean within themselves, and one day will drink the entire ocean. And the one who just by obtaining a drop, is satisfied then he has no connection with the ocean, then there's nothing to do with the ocean. Look, these are the lyrics of the song, 'Shirdi is within you, if you look inside your heart,' you repeatedly run towards Shirdi, the inclination you have towards Shirdi, see, I'm not against Shirdi, what is this song saying, please ponder a bit on it. Initially, as many times as possible, one should go to Shirdi, everyone should go. In the initial stage, for few years, as much time as you can give to Shirdi, you should give, and one should go with the feeling of devotion, not with the feeling of leisure, not with the desire to fulfill one's own selfish devotion, but with the feeling of knowing Baba's heart, one should go repeatedly. But if it's been 2-3 years, 4 years, now Baba says, 'Hey, stop, how many times will you come and look at these walls, look at my idol? I am the same. But in reality, you're seeing from the outside, to enter my samadhi mandir is also to see me from the outside. Because you can see my idol, you can see my samadhi mandir, you can see my Shirdi, you can see my Gurusthan, you can see my Chavadi. With your physical eyes, with your gross vision, you can see all these places of mine. But in reality, I am not just bound to these places. What you are seeing is just a drop. What you repeatedly see with your physical eyes, this is my physical form and it's just a drop. But in reality, to know, the entire ocean is still left. So, if by seeing my Shirdi with physical eyes, if you're satisfied, and if you don't even have the thirst to see that ocean, then you are very unfortunate. Everyone can see with physical eyes, but if you don't have the strength to explore my heart if you don't have the inclination to see the beats of my heart, if your curiosity to know me is not awakened, then you will never be able to know that ocean. You will consider the drop as the ocean, and one day you will depart from this world. Birth was precious, but will be exchanged for a mere penny. If you believe in birth, they say there are 84 lakhs species and humans are superior among all and if you could not attain my ocean, then I gave you a precious birth. I sent you as a human, so that you could absorb my entire ocean within yourself. But you turned out to be very unfortunate, that being content with my drop, you just kept sitting. You didn't have the curiosity to attain my ocean, nor did you have the thirst. Show me once the thirst to drink that ocean, if I don't enable you to absorb that ocean within you, then change my name. So, this is that song, 'Shirdi is within you, if you look inside your heart.' Until we rise from these physical views, please understand, you all go round and round, visiting Shirdi repeatedly standing in front of the samadhi mandir, either you make your requests, or if someone is very virtuous, they will ask for selfless devotion. Maybe among millions, there might be one person who goes to ask for their devotion. But what do we achieve from these physical eyes when we come to see the idol? and on top of it, to have the pride that today I stood for darshan in the Samadhi. No one threw me out, I stood inside for fifteen minutes. I kept looking at Baba for fifteen minutes. So what? in return I ask this question, so what? What did they achieve from it? Not only for fifteen minutes but what have those achieved who sit on the Samadhi for 24 hours. Ask them? I'm speaking bitter truths. You get 15 minutes to stand, and you claim your life is successful. What have those priests achieved who sit for 8-10 hours, spending their whole lives like that? Do you have an answer? You won't have an answer to that because in reality that not a Darshan. Yes, I repeat at the start, it plays a significant role for beginners it should happen, and one should also go repeatedly. But till when, for 2,3,4 years, enough, after that our gross vision should diminish and lead to subtle vision. And if subtle vision doesn't arise if one is stuck in gross vision. Then that Bhakti is of no use, it’s useless to spend time on that. Then it’s better to spend that time in your work, you will atleast earn something. Has our thinking become like this? Today, I had recognition with the priest, and he took me VIP-like and stood me directly in front. What's with that, my brother? What does that achieve? On top of that, he's being deceitful and also showing off. Who on earth is a VIP in front of Baba? I have stayed for months in Shirdi, I haven't felt the need to recognize anyone in Shirdi. I went for Baba, did whatever I had to do for Baba. Even there I didn’t serve at the Dwarkamai. We cleaned the toilets for years, where the devotees used to stay. Yes, today it's necessary to tell this because my feeling is that Baba resides in the devotee’s feet. For me, you're Baba, a divine form. And that's the way I served and what I'm speaking to you sincerely. So, I didn't feel the need to recognize anyone. I used to get up at five in the morning and not even wait for Kakad Aarti, instead used to run, there were thirty toilets in three floors. Soap, brush, liquid soap, powder, I used to clean those toilets in such a way. The feeling was that if I shine these toilets as much as possible, Baba will shine my heart even more. And today, if I'm able to express these things to you, there's so much history behind it. I've been stayed in Shirdi for so many years, but I've never left the queue to go there. It's not that I haven't recognized anyone big here. They used to say, \"Come at four in the evening, we'll take you down, to the original Samadhi of Baba.\" But I felt there was no need What would happen if you touch the Samadhi? If you have the courage, then reach till Baba’s heart and show it. But we are stuck in these things, we've eaten neem leaves, it felt bitter to some, it felt sweet to others. Some say, your faith isn't strong, that's why it felt bitter to you, otherwise it's very sweet But understanding the depth is not there. And to stand there repeatedly, but when it comes to understanding Baba's heart, then we are at the end, and when it comes to physical Darshan then at the very first place and they consider it as a blessing, “today I was made to stand in front of Baba like a VIP. These employees of the organization know me.” Why? my friend, why does it need to be like this? If you have to go there and stand in front like a servant, then why not just go as a servant for the darshan? Stand in the que and when your turn comes you will get the darshan at the samadhi mandir. Why get stuck in such activities? Firstly, you commit a sin, and then you boast about it, saying that we directly go for darshan. Is this how it works in the court of the Sadguru? “My recognition is with this trustee, my recognition is with that trustee. My recognition is with this villager of Shirdi.” Baba says one thing in Sai Satcharitra, chapter 14, please listen carefully to this saying. “In this world, someone belongs to someone, but here, no one is truly mine; What does this signify? Baba is saying, \"I have discarded all the worldly titles and distinctions. This is my right hand, this is my left hand, my elder brother is there for me; whenever trouble comes, my elder brother will stand by me. This MLA is my identity, this MP is my identity, this politician is my identity.\" What is this? Is this the mark of a Sai devotee? Why do you need such people when Baba is alive? Baba says, \"I have no one in the world. There is only Allah here.\" We should also be able to say that there is only Sai, and no one except him. The day your surrenderance becomes so pure, on that day you'll be worthy of being called a Sai devotee. Right now, he knows me, she knows me. This is special to me, that is special to me. These are the descendants, these are Baba’s descendants, today we were sitting at their house. Whom do we call descendants? Today I will tell you the meaning of descendants. Please listen carefully. Once Jesus, just like you all are sitting here, there are devotees sitting in front and Jesus was telling something about the supreme soul. Satsang is going on, satsang is happening in a room, a person comes cutting through the crowd of satsang to Jesus and says, 'Rabbi’, ‘Rabbi,' meaning Sadguru, O Rabbi, your mother and some people of your family have come.' Listen carefully. What are they saying to Jesus that your mother and some people of your family have come outside to meet you” Listen to Jesus’s answer and please listen carefully, who are the real descendants. Jesus says, \"My descendants are not my mother, my brother, or my sister. My wife or my child are not my descendants. My descendant is the one who knows the heart of the Sadguru, the will of the Sadguru, and acts accordingly. That is my descendant.\" So it is necessary to clean up some things and not get stuck in useless discussions. You spend your valuable time going to Shirdi, so firstly read three or four chapters. Until then, don't even enter the samadhi mandir. What kind of feeling will arise in you without reading the chapters of Sai Satcharitra, tell me. You enter the samadhi mandir carrying trash? If you don't read the Sai Satcharitra, before entering in. But if you immerse in the three chapters of Sai Satcharitra, then a great emotion will arise in you, and when you enter the samadhi mandir holding that emotion, the meeting that will take place will be wonderful. Just go running, running, running, running, and stand in front of the statue. So, ‘Shirdi is inside you’ and make an effort to see Shirdi with your subtle eyes. It’s enough of seeing Shirdi, samadhi mandir, dwarkamai, gurusthan with your gross vision, now try to see Shirdi with your subtle eyes. I have a video, I request you all, if you really want to see subtle Shirdi with subtle eyes, Baba is distributing chocolates, it's just the beginning phase. It goes on for a while, then it stops later. Dealing with so much fuss over it. Such is your experience? Indeed, this is the experience we share. Today, a feeling arose in me and Baba has done this. If you are truly beginners, then such leela is appreciable But if you've spent 5-6 years in devotion to Baba, and still, if you describe such experiences, then it really makes one question your intelligence. I feel sorry for your thinking. Is this an experience? Is this what you call an experience? the day when Baba's heart begins to open, to understand Baba's will, that's what you call an experience. Everything else is just trash. According to your mind, whatever is happening is all trash. If Baba's will begins to unfold in your heart, then consider it the father of experiences, the greatest experience of all in the world. And besides that, whatever is happening according to your mind, is garbage. So, don't be proud of it, don't go around boasting to four people, please. It's just trivial talk. I'm saying again, for those who are in a very early stage, it's okay, such acts are appreciable. But if you've spent three or four years in devotion to Baba, and if you're still stuck in the same phase, thinking \"I wished for this food and it came into my hands,\" Experience is when the day comes in devotion to Baba when you forget hunger and thirst, and that day you don't even realize that you haven't eaten food. That's what you call an experience. This is a true experience: that I was so engrossed in devotion to Baba today, so deeply absorbed, that neither hunger struck nor thirst woke up. When you've reached the doorstep, why not look inside the house? Now come inside a little too, Baba is saying, come and see inside my heart, see what my will is, what I desire from you You spent lifetimes persuading yourself, but now, at least understand my will a little, feel the beating of my heart, see a bit of it too. Just once, make a little entry inside. This path should be adorned with petals of faith and it says this spiritual path is not a straightforward one, it's strewn with thorns, troubles, yet those who have unwavering faith it takes adorning this path with the petals of such faith. Every time, things would happen according to my mind is not necessary. In the initial stage, Baba descends to our level and works according to our minds so that our faith becomes slightly stronger. But later, throughout our life, He works against our will. Only then our ego and body consciousness is destroyed or else it will sustain If everything happened according to my mind, then my body intellect wouldn't be wiped out even after millions of lifetimes. So, He works against our minds, not just for a month, two months, or even years but for lifetimes. If He is working against us, then how our faith will remain intact during that time? Please tell me. The one whose faith is so firmly rooted that today, when I desire something and Baba fulfills it for me, with such hollow faith, then how will I stand before them tomorrow when I face trials? Then in just four moments, you'll run away from there, thinking, \"That's it, This guy is going to kill me.\" But he's already there to kill. Why have we come under the guidance of the Sadguru? To be erased. Whoever is afraid, consider them dead. We have come under His guidance to be dissolved. If Baba doesn't erase, then Maya will erase eventually, will you remain in this world until eternity? One day, Maya will erase you. Whether in your 50s, 70s, 80s, or 90s. And if your life is long, then in a hundred years. Maya will indeed erase you one day. So why not die in the hands of Baba instead of Maya? Because when we die in the hands of Maya, we are bound to be reborn. But when we die in the sacred hands of Baba, we become the hero of the universe. One attains immortality. You become person untouched by death. This is the path that needs to be adorned with petals of faith. So, the petals of faith should be strong. I always say that if I experience moments of heaven at the feet of others, at the court of others, still I don't want to take a step there. Please pay attention to these words. If Baba, I experience moments of heaven at the feet of others, then I don't want to take a step there, and if I experience moments of hell at your feet, Baba, then I don't want to leave your shelter. This is called faith. He tested you a little, and you started running. 'Oh man, this guy is going to hit me.' Yes, he's already there to hit. I'll tell you an incident. Perhaps you're from the North, so you might not have heard the name. There's a village called Gondavale in the Satara district of Maharashtra. There was a saint there, Gondavalekar Maharaj. One incident from his life is that from a very young age, he had a curiosity to attain God. And at a very young age, around 15 or 16 years old, he left home to pursue the Guru So, another person tells them that there is a saint in such-and-such village named tukamai, and if you take shelter with him, your work will be done. So, he goes to his court, searching and searching, until he finally arrive. And as soon as they see each other, Tukamai, the Guru says to the child, \"Oh, you've come today.\" 'so come, today I will finish you off.\" The first line is, \"You've come today, you've come to me today, so come, I'll finish you off.\" So, what reply does the child give? \"I've come to be erased by your hands. Please erase me.\" So, this is the relationship between a Sadguru and a disciple. He are yearning to erase you, and if you are yearning to be erased, then the relationship will flourish. Otherwise, what kind of relationship is it? It's like saying that the train is running towards Kolkata, while the compartments are heading towards Kashmir. It's simply not possible. Wherever the engine goes, these compartments will also have to be attached to the engine and go in the same direction. They want to erase us, and we want to die in their hands. Because to die is to become one with existence, The one who is dying is perishable, and the one about to remain is immortal. It means an indivisible life, which death cannot touch. It's the soul, it's the essence of the divine. So, the meaning of the second stanza was that this is a path that needs to be adorned with the blossoms of faith. one has to awaken themselves and awaken others too. 'Master, you have brought me till here and have been directing me the destination. I could actually see the gap between.' I you've found my destination. So, when I look at others from where I stand, I see them on steps downward. Thus, I have to pull them up to my level, and I also have to complete my own remaining journey. Having lived in the world, try stepping away from it. Having spent so much time in the world, who knows how many lifetimes you've taken, how many times you've seen this world, how many times you've experienced the same pleasures. And how many times have you left your loved ones behind, because of attachment, crying, having to bid farewell to this world? Who knows how many times. This is what this world is. Besides this, what else is there in the world? Either your loved ones will leave you before you, or you will leave them. Apart from these two, what else is there? And both forms entail sorrow. Sorrow exists whether you have to leave your loved ones or if they leave you. Having lived in the world and then stepping away from it, you'll find that He stands close, bringing you closer to yourself. Shirdi is within you. Look inside your heart. This is the last stanza and very important saying - The one whom you seek you should know one's identity. As you are in search of Baba so Baba's identity should be known. Understanding Baba's form, His heart, and His will is crucial. It's said to be as vast as the ocean The recognition of whom you seek is essential, but every effort is fulfilled by the faith of the traveler. But the recognition of His true essence will only come through faith. You must maintain unwavering faith and patience. Only then will Baba open his heart before you and reveal his true form. Which in this song referred to as an ocean, the song further says, only one shore is nothing you are on the store how can fathom the depth of ocean from there?",
    "Description": "Om Sai Ram 🙏\nIn this soul-stirring talk, Krishnaji takes us beyond melody—into mantra.\nLine by line, stanza by stanza, He unpacks the inner essence of a powerful devotional song ‘Shirdi Tumhare Andar Hai’. What might seem like poetic praise on the surface transforms—under His guidance—into a deep, meditative exploration of bhakti, surrender, and self-realization.\nKrishnaji doesn’t just explain the words—He reveals the living truth hidden within them.\nWhether you’ve sung this bhajan for years or are hearing it for the first time, this satsang will transform it into an experience. It’s not just about understanding the song… it’s about letting it enter your heart, awaken your devotion, and draw you closer to the Divine.\n🙏 Let every verse become a mirror.\nLet every note become a step inward.\nLet every meaning unfold as darshan.\n\nॐ साई राम 🙏\nइस हृदय को झकझोर देने वाले सत्संग में, कृष्णाजी हमें सुरों से, मंत्र की गहराई तक ले जाते हैं।\nपंक्ति दर पंक्ति, चरण दर चरण, वे एक शक्तिशाली भक्तिगीत ‘शिरडी तुम्हारे अंदर है’ के आंतरिक सार को खोलते हैं।\nजो केवल एक काव्यात्मक स्तुति जैसा प्रतीत होता है, वह उनके मार्गदर्शन में एक गहन, ध्यानमय यात्रा बन जाता है—भक्ति, समर्पण और आत्मबोध की।\nकृष्णाजी केवल शब्दों का अर्थ नहीं बताते—\nवे उन शब्दों में छिपी जीवंत सत्यता को प्रकट करते हैं।\nचाहे आपने यह भजन वर्षों से गाया हो या पहली बार सुन रहे हों,\nयह सत्संग उस भजन को एक अनुभव में बदल देगा।\nयह केवल समझने का विषय नहीं—\nबल्कि उसे अपने हृदय में बसाने, अपनी भक्ति को जाग्रत करने, और ईश्वर के और निकट आने का निमंत्रण है।\n🙏हर पंक्ति एक दर्पण बन जाए।\nहर सुर एक अंतर्मुखी कदम।\nहर अर्थ एक दर्शन बन कर प्रकट हो।\n\n   • शिरडी... जो नर को नारायण बना दे ॥  \n\n#sai #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #like #comment #share#explore #fyp #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #values #youtube#zili#shraddha#saburi #newgeneration#peace #saisatcharitra#young #corespirituality #saileelarahasya#viral#krishnaji #saiamrutwani #saiamritvachan #saileelarahasya …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "26,498 views",
    "Likes": "921"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साईबाबा भक्तो को उपवास क्यो नही करने देते ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fNSFlxFDvJ0",
    "Transcript": "A day's worth of such effort equals the hardship of a thousand Shivratri fasts. Millions of salutations at the feet of all Sai devotees. Just yesterday, we celebrated the holy festival of Shivaratri. So, I thought to speak on that today. During Shivaratri, we all observe fasts and stay awake through the night in vigil, but our Baba never allowed us to fast. So why is that? Today's topic is why Sai Baba didn't allow fasting. Because this traditions have been going on since time immemorial, and not every tradition is correct. how many here know that Sai baba didn't allow to fast only a few people know about it. It just means that we believe in Baba and don't know him at all. We believe baba blindly. We are blind devotees; that's our condition. We don't even know if Baba ever advocated fasting or allowed it. He did not permit fasting Now the question arises, why did he do so? Because this decision of Baba goes against the world, it's contrary to the world. Baba spoke against the tradition (fasting) that have been going on for centuries, from time immemorial. There is no room in my court for fasting The fact that Baba spoke against tradition implies that there must be some reason behind it. He cannot speak without reason; nothing can come out of Baba's mouth without a reason. Now, we will investigate why Baba did this, why he did not encourage fasting. Let's see, in Chapter 32 of Shri Sai Satcharitra, Mrs. Gokhale writes a letter through Kashibai Kanetkar to Dada Kelkar, saying that she is coming to Shirdi and he should make arrangements for her stay. Mrs. Gokhale, with the determination to fast for three days, comes to Shirdi. She decides not to consume even a single grain of food for three days. She comes with this sentiment to Shirdi, and Baba's teachings on that. Now, with this sentiment, if one goes to other saints, they will encourage, saying, \"Yes, you are going in the right direction. Make it thirty days instead of three.\" Our understanding is so limited. Those who inflict the most pain on their bodies are considered the greatest devotees according to us. But Baba opposes this notion. So, what was Baba's teachings to Mrs. Gokhale regarding her intention to fast for three days i'll take those verses one by one, please open chapter 32 verse 124 of Sai satcharitra 'dev n labhe ritya poti' this is baba's preaching 'aadhi atmya chi kara santusthi' 'ya updeshachi anik gosthi shrotyan sathi nivedeto' 'bhuke ne ein duparche vakti, khal chi maati jai hoti varti, ann bramh padabhi vyakti upadete vrittis chityacha' When hunger strikes during midday, the ground beneath turns into the sky. It means neither the body functions properly nor the senses can perform their duties. In such a state, neither the mind works at its full capacity nor the intellect operates effectively. The condition of the mind, body, and senses becomes such without food. So, when the ground appears above, everything starts to scatter in confusion. We are not capable of thinking in the right direction, nor are we capable of understanding or doing anything properly. So when the ground appears above, it means everything starts to appear upside down. We cannot function at our full capacity. 'aati durdar yesi vela, tondi n deta anacha gola' 'hin din indriya mela visare nijkala sarvasvi' And in such times, if those senses, that body, that mind, and that intellect don't receive a little sustenance, they forget all their abilities. Devotion, which comes from the heart, from the senses, and from the intellect, you have killed them starving. Now, by what will you worship? Only the Supreme Being knows. Fasting is done for devotion, and the extreme fasting that you all engage in doesn't allow any department—neither the mind, nor the body, nor the senses, nor the intellect—to work at their full capacity. So how will you attain devotion? If you don't give food to these senses, if they are not well, with which eyes will you see the Supreme Being? And with which tongue will you sing His praises? Such weakness sets in, even meditation becomes difficult, they say. It means the ground starts appearing as the sky. It means everything becomes topsy-turvy. And it's not me saying this, it's Baba. In such a state, how will you worship Lord Shiva? No, then we have to come up with a new way of fasting Then we have sabudana khichdi. There are bananas, oranges, sweet lime, this that. We have plenty of options, it's alright it'll do a million times but completely fasting to the extreme, \"No, I won't even take a drop of water,\" this is a dangerous thing. This is extreme, and Baba is speaking against it. and suppose we have been fasting and even if dada sang the bhajan in his melodious voice we won't be able to understand its meaning nor it will resonante in our years due to weakness 'saransh sakal indriya shakti tarich ghadil deva chi bhakti This means that only when all senses receive strength, worship of Lord Shiva is possible. Worship of Sai is possible. Observing Ekadashi is possible. Observing Shivaratri fast is possible. Otherwise, it's impossible. 'jari ana vin shinatva yeti tari tya n gati paramarthi' - And if the senses start to weaken, if weakness creeps in due to lack of food, then your entry into spirituality is blocked. This is the preaching of Baba and he further says one more thing - 'ati bhijan tehi n hitkr mit bhojan khare sukhkar' - before this he said how dangerous is extreme fasting now he is suggesting moderate eating meaning eat that much which will aid you for devotion. If you got tasty food today, then eat a little more. It means you're not eating because of hunger but because of taste. And if you don't have your favorite food today, then you eat less than usual, it's a sign of illness. When faced with your favorite food, if you end up eating more than one and a half chapatis, but if you don't get it, you settle for less, Big diseases are waiting for such a person with such habit whenever you sit to eat, there is room for two or three extra servings, then get up. You should never eat until you're completely full. Moderate eating always brings contentment. 'upwas atirek bhayankar, asukh nirantr bhogavi' - Fasting and Eating too much is terrifying. It always brings sorrow, poverty, and darkness. 'babanchya nitya kranma nusar, parmartha cha karita vichar adhi kamres bandhavi bhakar bai cha nirdhar ufrata first, eat your meal, and then contemplate on spirituality. Don't lean towards fasting, this is Baba's teaching, strictly for the seekers of the ultimate truth. Now, for worldly people who think what spiritual quest do we have? We will do moderate fasting then do it But remember, for those who are deeply involved in spiritual pursuit, fasting is not something at all. Baba is speaking strictly, no exaggeration. However,the one who came to Shirdi with the intention of fasting for three days, the women, her intention was exactly the opposite that I will fast strictly for three days, if you truly want to attain God, then quietly give a little food to your stomach first, give a small piece of bread to your stomach first, but a little is said, moderate eating, and in this way if you cannot content your soul then how God will be found. One whose stomach is hungry, God's touch may not reach till the end of the kalp (eon). These are the teachings of Baba - 'bhukelya poti dev sapde, he n ghade kalpanti upwas tapas yanche sakde chale n ikde sais' - Finish! No Shivratri, no Ekadashi. How many people observed fasting yesterday? Please raise your hands. No, but one thing is if you have embraced the spiritual life, if you are connected to Baba for spirituality, then fasting should stop after today. Yes, but if you consider yourself an ordinary householder, then you should continue until He himself emancipates. Yes, I'll also mention this because those who hold onto household responsibilities, abruptly quitting is not advisable. But for those who want to live spiritual life it is not permitted not in His court 'bhukelya poti dev spade he toh kalpanti hi na ghade upas tapas yanche sakade chale n ikde sain si Here, all this doesn't work, so I was saying that fasting doesn't suit Baba. Alright, now I'm coming to you. Why do you keep fasting? That's also very important, isn't it? There are two reasons for it rather three reasons. First reason is that Shivaratri comes once a year. If Shivaratri came everyday, nobody would fast. It comes once a year, so we fast. Alright, that's one reason. And the second reason is that some people fast for a day to stay healthy. It's a physical need. Staying hungry keeps the body healthy. But even that, if you maintain the feeling of health, maybe you'll get some results. The third reason is fear; the whole world expects it. If I don't do it, then... And the fourth reason is that some people emotionally blackmail by observing such strict fasting on Shivratri, claiming it's done to please Lord Shiva. I'm not speaking for everyone, but of some people so these are some reasons and Baba says that if you are fasting for these reasons then its not of worth Mrs. Gokhale is told by Baba that some children are starving at the house of a Brahmin. His wife, due to her menstrual cycle, is unable to cook, and as the children are young, such things were strictly observed during those times. When menstrual cycle arrived, the woman would stay away from the household chores for five consecutive days, leaving the children hungry. Baba tells her to go to their house and cook puran poli, to feed both herself and the children. In this way, Baba didn't let Mrs. Gokhale fast for three days. Mrs. Gokhale wonders why Baba said this. Through this act, Baba wanted to make everyone understand through Mrs. Gokhale that instead of subjecting your body and senses to torment by fasting, it is better to eat something and energize yourself. By doing so, you can channel that energy positively towards the community. such shivratri is better than thousands of shivratri Now, whatever reasons you have for fasting, it is useless in front of these teachings Baba has uprooted the rituals practiced traditionally Sometimes we hear in the newspapers that someone fasted so rigorously that later four people had to take them to the hospital in distress. No, This is not the way. He couldn't even take care of himself. He was hospitalize with help of others. This is called extreme fasting. So Baba says it's better to eat something and channel the energy within oneself, and to use that energy for the benefit of others and the community. So, such vow if you keep, it's as better as a thousand Shivratri. A day's worth of effort equals the hardship of a thousand Shivratri fasts. Now, I leave this talk to you all to decide what you think about fasting. After hearing this, whether you want to torment yourself by not eating or to help others by eating two morsels We all are devotees of Sai, right? We believe in the Guru, don't we? So, we must also know the Guru's will. Today it's understood why Baba is against fasting. So, how many people will refrain from fasting in life after today?\"",
    "Description": "साईं बाबा ने उपवास क्यों मना किया? | शिवरात्रि व्रत पर साईं सच्चरित्र से गहन सत्संग\n\nशिवरात्रि का पवित्र त्योहार हम सभी मनाते हैं और इस दिन उपवास रखकर भगवान शिव की आराधना करते हैं। पर क्या आप जानते हैं कि साईं बाबा ने कभी भी कठोर उपवास करने की अनुमति नहीं दी? इस वीडियो सत्संग में हम जानेंगे कि बाबा ने उपवास को क्यों मना किया और उनका असली संदेश क्या था।\n\nवीडियो में मुख्य बातें:\nसाईं बाबा का उपवास के खिलाफ विचार: बाबा कहते हैं कि उपवास से शरीर, मन, इंद्रियाँ और बुद्धि कमजोर हो जाती हैं, जिससे भक्ति और ध्यान में बाधा आती है।\nश्री साईं सच्चरित्र के अध्याय 32 से उद्धरण: मिसेज गोखले के तीन दिन के कठोर उपवास की कथा और बाबा का मध्यम भोजन का आदेश।\nशारीरिक व मानसिक स्वस्थता का महत्व: भूखा शरीर और थका हुआ मन भगवान की भक्ति नहीं कर सकते। भक्ति तभी सफल होती है जब हम अपने शरीर को ठीक से पोषण दें।\nपरंपराओं के परे सोचने का आग्रह: बाबा ने सदियों से चली आ रही उपवास की प्रथा के विरुद्ध जाकर यह सिखाया कि असली भक्ति शरीर और मन के सामंजस्य से ही संभव है।\nमध्यम आहार का संदेश: \"इतना खाओ जितना भक्ति के लिए जरूरी हो, ज्यादा या कम दोनों ही हानिकारक हैं।\"\nसमाज सेवा को उपवास से श्रेष्ठ बताया: दूसरों की सेवा करना और अपनी ऊर्जा को सकारात्मक दिशा में लगाना हजारों कठोर उपवासों से बेहतर है।\nआध्यात्मिक साधना और संतुलन: उपवास न करके भी आध्यात्मिक प्रगति संभव है यदि हम संतुलित जीवन जिएं और बाबा की मंशा को समझें।\nबाबा का सशक्त उपदेश:\n“भूखे पेट भगवान की भक्ति नहीं हो सकती। जो शरीर और इंद्रियाँ कमजोर होती हैं, वे भक्ति के योग्य नहीं होतीं। इसलिए संयमित भोजन आवश्यक है।”\nआपसे आग्रह:\nइस सत्संग को ध्यान से सुनें और सोचें कि क्या आप अपनी परंपरागत उपवास की प्रथा को बाबा की शिक्षाओं के अनुसार बदलना चाहेंगे? क्या अब से आप अपनी भक्ति को स्वस्थ शरीर और मन के साथ संतुलित करेंगे?\n\nहम साईं भक्त हैं और गुरु की मंशा जानना हमारा कर्तव्य है। इसीलिए इस वीडियो को जरूर देखें और अपने विचार नीचे कमेंट में लिखें।\n\n#साईंबाबा #शिवरात्रिव्रत #उपवास #साईंसच्चरित्र #आध्यात्मिकसत्संग #भक्ति\n\nअगर आप चाहें तो इसे अपने मित्रों के साथ भी साझा करें ताकि सभी को साईं बाबा के असली संदेश का ज्ञान हो।\n\n\nWhy Did Sai Baba Discourage Fasting? | A Deep Satsang on Shivratri Vrat through the Sai Satcharitra\n\nWe all celebrate the sacred festival of Shivratri by observing a fast and worshipping Lord Shiva.\nBut did you know that Sai Baba never approved of harsh fasting practices?\nIn this satsang video, we explore why Baba discouraged fasting and what his true spiritual message was.\n\nKey Highlights of the Video:\n🔹 Sai Baba’s perspective on fasting:\nBaba believed that fasting weakens the body, mind, senses, and intellect — all of which are necessary tools for true devotion and meditation.\n\n🔹 Reference from Shri Sai Satcharitra – Chapter 32:\nThe story of Mrs. Gokhale’s strict three-day fast and how Baba gently instructed her to eat moderately.\n\n🔹 Importance of physical and mental well-being:\nA hungry body and tired mind are not capable of true devotion. Only a well-nourished body can support sustained spiritual practice.\n\n🔹 Encouragement to think beyond rigid traditions:\nBy going against the age-old ritual of fasting, Baba taught that real devotion is rooted in balance and harmony between body and mind.\n\n🔹 Message of moderate eating:\n\"Eat only as much as needed to support devotion. Too much or too little — both are harmful.\"\n\n🔹 Service above fasting:\nBaba considered serving others and using our energy positively far superior to performing countless rigorous fasts.\n\n🔹 Spiritual growth through balance:\nOne can make spiritual progress even without fasting, if one lives a balanced life and follows Baba’s true intent.\n\nBaba’s Powerful Teaching:\n“True devotion cannot arise from an empty stomach.\nA weakened body and senses are not fit for worship.\nTherefore, regulated and nourishing food is essential.”\nA Loving Request to You:\nWatch this satsang with full attention and reflect:\nAre you ready to rethink traditional fasting practices in light of Baba’s wisdom?\nWill you now align your devotion with a healthy, nourished body and mind?\n\nAs Sai devotees, it is our sacred duty to understand our Guru’s intent.\nSo do watch this video and share your thoughts in the comments below.\n\n#SaiBaba #ShivratriVrat #Fasting #SaiSatcharitra #SpiritualSatsang #Devotion\n\n👉 Feel free to share this video with your friends and family so that more people can understand the true essence of Sai Baba’s message. …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saileelarahasya, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, krishnaji mumbaiwale, sai leela rahasya, saibaba, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, sai baba ka granth, sai, saibaba mandir, sai shirdi, shirdi satsang krishnaji, goa satsang krishnaji, mumbai satsang krishnaji, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "3,926 views",
    "Likes": "277"
  },
  {
    "Title": "जानकारी कभी भी 'ज्ञान' नही होता !",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eMM_eFO08PA",
    "Transcript": "Seven births ago, he was as knowledgeable as you. I merely brought him seven births back. These seven lines are lines of his seven births. After crossing each birth, I brought it back to that birth and told him to respond to you; So he was as pure at that time, but just like you, indulging in arrogance, he has become entangled in information and has ended up in such a state. Today's topic is knowledge informative and educational knowledge, which comes in two forms: information and wisdom, real experience. What has happened? This Kalyug has arrived, where the one providing information has become a Gyani (wisdom holder), so it's a huge danger. Start dealing with this danger from now on for the future; otherwise, it will drown the entire human race. The one giving information has become wise. No one wants to speak about original knowledge, neither hear about it, nor contemplate on it. What is being received as information is considered knowledge, but information is a cheap thing, and experience is the essence of life. If this difference is not understood quickly, then the entire future, the entire human race, is in danger. Look, who is information? That I read from a book, or heard someone say something, I read something from a book, and now I open a channel and I'm telling people that this is Sai Baba. The other is experiencing; first lived, then experienced, and then I am trying to explain that to people. So, there is a vast difference between information and knowledge. Ninety-nine point nine-nine percent of people provide information, if someone shares experience in a conversation, it's a big deal. If someone shares knowledge, it's a big deal. But it doesn't happen. Normally, information is mistaken for knowledge, neither the speaker nor the listener knows if it's knowledge or just information. But for the speaker, information is wisdom, for the listener too, information is wisdom, and giving information is a very easy thing. For giving information, you should have three things: first, command over your language, and you should have a subject because you read it from this scripture, you read it from that scripture, you read it from this or that magazine, and then there should be a way of speaking. Then you become knowledgeable: command over language, a storehouse of information, and the art of speaking. with these three things you can reach information to many people effectively, but there is a danger, that's not knowledge, and for knowledge too, three things are needed. First, purity of mind, second, humility, and third, self experience. After that, every act of Sai Satcharitra opens up. Before that, try as much as you want; it won't open up to you. Baba has cleverly placed those acts in parables, saying, \"First come into experience, then this will open up for you.\" By the power of mere information, you won't even enter my Sai Satcharitra. So, this danger needs to be understood very well from scratch; otherwise, this danger is looming over the entire human race. Every person providing information becomes a sage, a saint, and this should be understood thoroughly from the root. This danger needs to be understood very quickly; otherwise, it will become a upper hand Now, see, Kabir Ji says in a couplet that, kabir ji knew this thing about a hundred years ago and wrote couplets related to this at that time He says,\" kahta toh bohot mile, gehta mila na koi so kahta wo jan de, so nahi gehta hoi\" Let go those who are going to say; they are not the ones who find depth and had experience. If they are not the ones who find depth, then don't listen to their words, don't encourage such people; they will spoil the entire system. And further, Kabir Ji brings another point, \"laya sakhi banay ke sakhi means who brings together an important subject matter from here and there - \"iit utt akshar kaat\" cutting some words from here, cutting some from there, listening to something here, stealing something there, by doing this, one creates a subject, develop it, and further kabirji says,\"kahat kabir kab tak jiye jhuti pattal chaat\" licking dishes contaminated by others, for how long will you live? You haven't found your experience, you keep accumulating only information, keep stealing. Sometimes picking from this scripture, sometimes from that scripture. There's no experience. If there were experience, Sai Satcharitra would have been revealed. All the parables of Jesus would have opened up. Why are these parables kept? So that to wake up faint, nurture the experience, and then, later, understand these parables. Parables mean the hidden stories. All the acts Baba did in Sai Satcharitra are hidden. No parable has opened up till today for how long will you live licking others used plates? drop all this and be in pursuit of experience otherwise lives would be ruin as such, this is what kabirji is saying. these words were spoken hundreds of years ago. Kabir Ji means he had sensed the danger long ago and further he says, \"karni bin kathani kahe agyani din raat This ignorant just keeps on blabbering day and night. but doesn't live life of that ethics Like a dog, one roam around barking emptily, repeating what one have heard, but have no personal experience to share. Kabir's words hit directly where it hurts, like a slap on the cheek that's why Kabir's teachings never gained popularity. People get irritated by him because he speaks straightforwardly. Kabir understands how to explain with love, but sometimes he speaks in a very sharp tone, which people don't like. He lives not as he preaches. His life isn't as elevated; it's empty, filled with desires, vices, ignorance, and pride. He talks big but accomplishes little. He keeps blabbering day and night, like a fool, speaking nonsense. wanders like a barking dog He hears from here, hears from there, gathers from here, steals from there, reads from this book, reads from that book, and kept the same. so kabirji criticizes informative knowledge in such a way kabirji has list i will tell a story listen carefully depicting the difference between informative and experienced people but listen it carefully so it will be absorbed with very well An avatar of dattareya was nirsihsaraswati and he was storehouse of experience. He was not knowledgeable about words, he was knowledgeable about experiences. Where there is experience, it takes some time. It takes time for the stars to shine, for the sun to shine. But once it shines, its brightness lasts as long as this universe exists. so nursihsaraswati was one among them. It took time to win people's hearts, but once won, they were won completely. The scholars, feeling a bit jealous, started to plot against him when they noticed his rising popularity, trying to insult him and to prove that his knowledge is fake So there was a scholar who was highly proficient in the Vedas. Taking his disciples along, he went near the hermitage of Nursih Maharaj. 'Today, you are held in such high esteem by the public that they consider you almost like a god.'But they are mistaken; it's their foolishness. I am not a god; these are the words of Saraswati. 'no' says the scholar ' i want to prove that who the real god is? you or i', saraswati says,' three is no need to prove this i believe that you are.' 'no you are trying to save your skin. you will have to prove it.' to which he replies,'no i don't as i am a servant at your feet' 'no you trying to make it safe. i ll ask you questions to you to answer and then you will have ask me the question to me to answer and then people will decide' but who is so wise in the crowd who can judge the right and wrong they are normal people \"No, those people will understand. First, if you ask a question, I will answer it.\" If there's no belief, it's the arrogance of that person. And a proud person doesn't accept things easily. And Nusimv Saraswati is saying before entering into a debate, humbles himself, saying, 'Yes, you are God, and I am your servant.' But the one who is proud is not ready to accept.\" so at the end he asks a question to nursih saraswati, a shloka from vedant and asked him to answer So, Nursih Saraswati says, \"Alright, bring a small stick\" and someone gave the stick to him and he drew seven lines one after the other so the scholar retorts.\" why are you doing this instead of giving me the answer\". \"yes i am giving the answer to your question\" - \"then why are you drawing these line just give the answer Brother, I'm doing the same. Keep a little patience and calmness; I'm about to answer. and far there is a very savage man who survives over dog's meat The person is wild, he hasn't bathed for at least several months. he call him by calling out his name 'bhola' so he responds to the call by going there. To which the scholar questions why did you called him just give the answer to my question Sarawati affirms the scholar for answer and requests bhola (wild man) to cross the seven lines and stand there Bhola does accordingly now just ask the same question to that you asked to him, this wild man will answer said nursih saraswati So the pundit says, \"what!, he will give an answer.\" you may not know him, but I know. He is a person who lives by eating the flesh of dogs. \"he don't know Sanskrit, what answer will it give you? you give me\" so he asks the question to the savage and he answers it in sanskrit that it flabbergasts the scholar The pandit gets completely surprised and asks what is this? are you some kind of illusionist? no i m not seven births before he was as scholar as you i have just taken him seven biths back. These 7 lines are his births. After crossing each birth, I brought it back to that birth and told him to respond to you; So he was as pure at that time, but just like you, indulging in arrogance, he has become entangled in information and has ended up in such a state. Do not be egoistic about information. The one who possesses information tends to believe that they should gather all the information in the world and present it before others. However, in reality, neither does it benefit them nor does it benefit the listeners. Because until you are speaking from the standpoint of purity of mind, what you say does not touch the heart of the listener, it can only momentarily affect them. It can charge the person for a while, but it has no lasting value for either the speaker or the listener. It's just an unnecessary endeavour, a waste of time and energy. These seven lines prove that seven lifetimes ago, he was just like you, as arrogant and knowledgeable. But look where this arrogance has led him. So, you too are on the same path, brother, be careful. So, this is information and knowledge. “Pothi padh padh jag mua, pandit bhayo na koye, dhai akhshar prem ka, padhe so pandit hoye” I believe that this story clears things up very well. Now, I will take a story from Khaparde's diary that confirms this very point. Baba is sitting in Dwarkamai one day, and he narrates a story among his devotees. I'll take that story from Khaparde's diary because it directly corroborates this. Since it's a closely related story, I'll take it directly from Khaparde's diary. The story is recorded in Khaparde's diary dated 29th December 1911. I'll read it exactly as it is, and we'll unfold the depth of that story, uncovering its intricacies. I got a little delayed in getting up. Khaparde is writing this diary. I'll also provide a Hindi translation. I got up a little late, and I sat down to talk to Natekar, whom we call Hamsa. I couldn't get up early, nor could I fulfill my duties, which I used to do every day, observing Baba as he went out to lendi baugh and offering my prayers. But due to being late that day, I missed seeing Baba. But when Baba used to spend an hour there in lendi baugh and then return towards Dwarkamai, that's when I saw him because I had woken up late, as Khaparde is saying. And Hamsa, Natekar, was with me. And Baba was in a very good mood that day. You see, these are all the things they are narrating, it feels like we are witnessing it live, as if Baba is standing before us. This is the special characteristic of Khaparde's diary. Baba was in a very good mood; he was telling a good story that was highly enlightening, offering much to take away from it. However, Trimbakrao, whom we called Maruti, foolishly jumped in between and diverted Baba's topic. That's why one should never interrupt when a good topic is being discussed; often, the pearls about to be grasped slip away. But that Maruti, whom we called Trimbakrao, jumped in between Baba's discourse, disturbed Baba, and the pearls slipped from our hands. Now let's come back to the main topic, what was that story? There was a man who was very hungry and in need of all kinds of food. He wandered until he reached Baba's father, meaning here he reached Baba's guru, and whatever he desired, he found it all there. Here, the hunger he had was for knowledge, for information, not for food. He wanted knowledge from all around the world, and he found plenty of it at Baba's father's house. What did the man do? Firstly, he consumed everything he received voraciously, and he became quite fat, metaphorically implying he absorbed a lot of information. He also stole some ornaments, meaning here spiritual attainments. He stole everything from Baba's possession and left after tying up his sack. He had come solely to acquire information, not to gain experience, alright. But in reality, he was connected to Baba's father's house from previous lives, but due to these unethical actions, he could never truly obtain genuine things from there, alright. He picked up the entire bundle he had stolen and placed it in a corner to avoid being caught. He thought he would come back later to retrieve everything. But after a while, when he looked, those same people had stolen the bundle again. Meaning, stolen goods end up being stolen once more. So, finally, he thought, \"Oh dear, I stole so much, and now I'm empty-handed. What should I do now?\" So, he goes back again, steals again. So, in this way, he delayed a little to escape from the people, but those same people stole it again. Then he went back home, meaning he went back to Baba's father's house, which means he went back to Baba's guru's house. He was Baba’s condisciple, but he was driven by the desire to steal. And the experiences are attained by serving, not by stealing. But then he stayed there for a few days and eventually stole some more ornaments from Baba. In the end, some people suspected that he had stolen again this time, so a few of them came and beat him up and took him away. It means that at any cost, the information we steal ultimately betrays us. There is no actual knowledge; it's all rubbish, but even that rubbish doesn't stick with us. So, that's why in life, we shouldn't think about information but rather about original knowledge. This story tells us that. So, this story, this subject, I feel it's a very important topic. Knowledge, being informative and educative. So, this was the entire topic for today. And now we'll stop here for today.",
    "Description": "जानकारी कभी भी 'ज्ञान'नही होता ।#sai #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #like #comment #share#explore #fyp #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #values #youtube#zili#shraddha#saburi #newgeneration#peace #saisatcharitra#young #corespirituality #saileelarahasya#viral …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "3,898 views",
    "Likes": "296"
  },
  {
    "Title": "सज्जन की पीढ़ा भली.......",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pQC6MTL6Dz0&pp=0gcJCSMKAYcqIYzv",
    "Transcript": "This is a Doha (couplet) by Kabir Ji, which says that the company of good people, even if one faces countless obstacles, criticisms, or pains, one should not leave such company. Because the company of good individuals pierces the heart. So Kabir Ji says that 'Durjan ki karuna buri, bhalo sajaan ko tras' So, if the wicked person is present in your life, and he might also be providing you with worldly comforts He fulfills your every demand, moment by moment, providing you with happiness and contentment. still one must not to associate with such a person's shadow either. but if you are facing trouble because of a righteous person then do believe that it happens for good when the sun heats up. When the sun gives heat, when it reaches 45, 47, 48 degrees and scorches the entire world, in that same heat, another event occurs, which our ordinary eyes do not see. That event is when the sun's heat falls on the water of the ocean, it lifts the salty water, forming clouds, then it converts that heat into rainwater, and showers it on the earth. So the heat does the work, although it might seem bitter, it's the truth, and I always speak what's real. Those who are deceitful, hypocritical will leave us, but those who are honest, true, and genuine will always be connected to us in every situation. shree satchitanand sainath maharaj ki jai",
    "Description": "#Sai#Shirdi#newgeneration#jaisai#peace#spiritualism#spirituality#newgeneration #explore #like #genz #youtube #omsairam #omsaibaba #zill#subscribe …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "2,447 views",
    "Likes": "262"
  },
  {
    "Title": "सद्गुरू साई को हमने एक मामूली बंजारा बना दिया",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pVeL66yGv1w&pp=0gcJCSMKAYcqIYzv",
    "Transcript": "we must ask Baba,\"You are our sadguru but do you consider us your disciple?\" There is to be a two-way relationship, isn't it? If we announce Baba as our Sadguru then Baba too has to consider us as His disciple. Now, i am taking an important leela from Sai satcharitra so it's a request to listen it with attention. Let me ask you a question? How many believe that Baba is their Sadguru please raise hands. How many believe Baba to be Sadguru, nearly everyone believes him to be Sadguru. Believe him to be Sadguru. Why I am asking this will be clear in some time. In reality if I tell someone that he is my Sadguru what does it mean. Will you be able to define. If you believe that Baba is our Sadguru then on what basis do you say that he is Sadguru? What are the fundamental things that makes you feel that Saibaba is my Sadguru. And secondly, what is the difference between God and Sadguru. What is the difference. The difference is huge. That is why there are people who worship Krishna, There are people who worship Shivji, there are people who worship Brahma, there are people who worship 33 crores Gods and Goddesses in that Sadguru also comes but about them it is said Gurur Brahma Gurur Vishnu, Gurur Devo Maheshwara, Guru Sakshat Parabrahma, tasmai Shree Guruve namah. Why has Guru been given so much importance? Guru has been given so much importance because this human body that we have Guru who brings it to its destination that is why his greatness is much more than all the three and he is said to be parabrahma. The stage that he has reached to, he also brings us to that stage, the completeness that he has attained to, he fills us also with that completeness. That is why the status of Sadguru is very very high. It is very high If we say that Saibaba is our Sadguru then the what it means is what is Sadguru’s will. It is very important to know that. Sadguru’s will is Sadguru. Sadguru’s body is not Sadguru. If we do not understand Sadguru’s will and if we say that Saibaba is my Sadguru then we are making some mistake. We only keep saying Sadguru Sainath Maharaj ki jai. But in reality, we do not know even an iota of Sadguru’s will. And if we do not know His will then how is he, our Sadguru? Now I had asked how many people believe Baba to be Sadguru then everyone’s hands were raised. Now I ask another question how many people know Baba’s will completely. Now raise your hands. See, this is the difference. Not a single hand is raised. That means you cannot say with confidence that you know Sai’s will. We only believe Sai to be Guru. We don’t know it. And if we do not know His will then how is he, our Sadguru. Then on what basis is he, our Sadguru. We are miles away from His will. We don’t have the capacity to understand his feelings. We don’t have that capability. Then how does he become our Sadguru? It means due to our sentiments we keep calling him Sadguru. That is our sentiment. Actually, if you tell Baba that I believe you to be Sadguru do you consider me to be your disciple. It has to be two-way relationship. If I call him my Sadguru Then Baba also has to say in return that ne is my disciple. Will Baba say that he is my disciple. For 99.99% people Baba will not say. The reason for that is we do not know His will. Without knowing His will we consider him to be our Sadguru. There is no clarity with Baba. This is a big mockery. We just cheer with our mouth Sachidanand Sadguru Sainath Maharaj ki jai. Just once ask your conscience is he really your Sadguru. Do you really understand his mind, will and sentiments? And do you respect that? We become sentimental and impose our emotions on him. And we have a weapon in our hand Jaki Bhavana jaisi Prabhu murth tin taise. 'jaya mani jaisa bhav taya taisa anubhav' This is a one-way relationship. You have been telling Baba for lifetimes that you are my Sadguru but Sadguru does not say that he is my disciple. It is a one way relationship. Now I will come to that story. Sai Satcharitra tells this thing and Baba has hidden this Leela in the book. Now I will open it in front of you. You will understand why I said these things. That in fact we call Sadguru Sadguru but we do not consider him to be Sadguru and we do not know His will. That is why inspite of talking about it he is not actually our Sadguru. I speak bitterly It is bitter and hurts but there is truth in it. Each one of us has to accept it. When I will open up the Leela from Sai Satcharitra Adhyay 32 then you will understand that we really only speaking that Baba is our Sadguru but actually we do not know His will. We only talk that he is our Sadguru. Now I come to Adhyay 32. It is a small Leela. Baba along with his three classmates go out in search of Brahma Gyan (Knowledge of the universe). And all the four have been described as being Scholar. They were very knowledgeable, they had deep knowledge of the Shastras and with all the knowledge of the Shastras and Vedas, Vedant with all that light they go in search of Brahma Gyan. Baba is also one of them. Baba is doing this Leela. In reality Baba need not go in search of Brahma Gyan, he is Brahmand Nayak (Ruler of the Universe) but many times in Sai Charitra he has brought himself down so that he can give us some advice, so he can teach us. First Classmate of Baba says Ekda amhi chaughe jan vachuni pothi puran karu lagalo brahma nirupan Gyan sampanna houni. All the four us after acquiring knowledge, talking about Brahma we go seeking Brahma Gyan. From amongst them one says Udharadatmanaam, he giteche gheuni vachan, ayukta sarvthaiv paravlambana, aise pravachan ek kari. One of them says Udharadatmanaam. Bhagvat Gita says that every person must work out his own salvation. One should not be dependent on others. One amongst them is saying One should take efforts and one should attain Brahma Gyan by one’s own efforts. This is what first person says. The second one says Taya pratutar kari anya, man Swadhin tochi danya, The second one says the one who can control his mind the one who has controlled his mind he is the Blessed One in this world asave sankalp vikalp shunya kahi n apna vin And he says that a person should escape from the sankalp vikalp, alright, what is this sankalp vikalp? Many people might be wondering what these alternatives of resolutions are. There are occasions in life where one stands at a crossroad, not knowing whether to take this path or that, what seems right initially, later, after some time, doesn't seem right, so these alternatives of resolutions that fluctuate, that are unstable within the mind. So, the one who eliminates that instability forever, has clarity forever. Now, whatever one sees in life, one sees with complete clarity. Never does one fall prey to the dilemmas of resolutions. So, the one who gains control over their mind, the one whose alternatives of resolutions are eradicated, is the rightful heir to the knowledge of the universe. This is what the second is saying. first said that we have to seek Bramhagyan on our own without being dependent on others and the third says that - anitya sarva prakar nitya ek nirvikar; The world is impermanent, not eternal, transient Such discrimination between the eternal and impermanent, the knowledge of which leads to the understanding that this world is impermanent, and only the Supreme Being is eternal The one who possesses that knowledge, that discrimination. Meaning, he is on the path of knowledge So they say, only the one who is the possessor of that knowledge is the rightful heir to the wisdom of the universe. Now, see, all three of them are speaking the truth. No one here is inferior. And the fourth one, what does Baba say? The fourth one doesn't like the knowledge from books. He says, perform respectful conduct, one's conduct in life should be pure. It doesn't matter what we read and acquire, what matters is how we live, Our conduct matters. Our conduct should be prescribed, Not prohibited Prescribed conduct means the conduct that the Vedas have given, the Upanishads have given, that is considered correct, pure, and holy. about Baba it says,'the fourth did not approve of bookish learning but believed in conducting oneself in conformity with the shastras and offering oneself totally at the Guru's feet' and Baba says,\"these body, speech, five vital airs, mind ,intellect all should be surrendered at the feet of Guru by us\" What Baba feels is that no matter how much theoretical knowledge you gain, memorize, or understand, nothing will come of it. The conduct of a person should be pure, first and foremost, and secondly, one should surrender to the feet of the Guru. One should find refuge in the true Guru, only then will one attain Brahmagyan. Now, these are Baba's words. So in this way all four set out in search of Brahmagyan When they set out in search of Brahmagyan, the forest they were traversing through was so dense, the jungle so thick, that not even a ray of sunlight could penetrate through to them. So, Baba is associating the world with that forest there. This world is also a forest, an impassable forest, where not even a ray of sunlight reaches us. So, Baba is saying, just as if you pass through a dense jungle and if the density is so much, the whole jungle, then not even a single ray of sunlight can reach us, similarly, this world is also a dense jungle, and here too, that ray of knowledge, that ray of wisdom, that ray of eternity, does not reach our hearts. But still all four with their respective feelings embarks on search and while roaming they meet a Banjara (gypsy) Bajara asks for their destination to them all four feel that being a wanderer he himself has no abode so why to tell him so the one who himself is not stable what help he can provide us? so they deny to tell him and follow their path including Baba wandering into the labyrinth of that forest they again reach back to the same where that wanderer was standing This means all four are unsettled but the wanderer is settled therefore they again retreat back to the wanderer so he says,\"Now you all must have understood if you still don't want to tell then don't but its afternoon and sun is overhead heating and you all must have starving and thirsty. I have a bread eat it with the chutney and then you may go after drinking little water so three of them feels that firstly we have left with very grave feeling and this wanderer is blacking us again and again so they again scorning his request and move forward but Baba remains there Baba feels that what will he gain on feeling our hunger and thirst so he should be obeyed. Baba told him to give him the bread. so the wanderer takes him and gives him quarterly bread and quench his thirst No sooner did Baba eat the bread given by the wanderer than as per the book Gurudev appears Now my question is to the people who have read Sai satcharitra has any person like a rushi muni appeared there? wasDid that gypsy leave from there and did some other guru appear in the place of the gypsy? Baba did not have any Guru earlier because it is clearly written that we four also set out in search of Brahmagyan on our own, but Baba's feeling was that if one gets the refuge of the Guru, then it would be the best. So now the question is that he told the Banjara to eat this Chatkur Roti, meaning eat this roti and dry chutney, I have nothing other than that, so as soon as Baba accepts his orders, he eats the roti and drinks the water and that Banjara himself becomes the Sadguru. This is the depth of this leela. Till they did not listen to the Banjara, they kept doing as they pleased, kept wandering from place to place, till then he was an ordinary Banjara, but as soon as he accepted his orders, the Banjara said eat the roti and drink this water and as he accepted his wish, followed his orders and that Banjara himself became the Sadguru in that very moment. So what does this story tell us that today we all go running to Shirdi, book a room, take a bath, wear the best clothes and run around to have Baba's darshan at Samadhi Bandir, but today i ask you the question that whoes darsham do you take Sadguru or a Banjara? If His wish is not know to us, What are their expectations from us? if we don't have leisure time and we keep calling out to Baba from our own emotions, then we have reduced the infinite cosmic master, the eternal blissful true guru, to a mere wanderer. And if we understand His will, comprehend His intent, and live our lives according to that intent, then we turn an ordinary wanderer into the infinite cosmic master, the true guru, Sai Nath Maharaj. Thus, we are the ones who make Him a wanderer, and we are also the ones who make Him the eternal blissful true guru. This play is so important that I asked my first question: How many people here consider Baba as a true guru? Everyone raised their hands. My second question was: How many people know Baba's will? Not a single hand was raised. So, this means that for 101% for us, Sai Baba sitting in the Shirdi Samadhi Temple is a wanderer, not a true guru, because we do not know what His will is. I am speaking very harshly, but if you do not listen today, you will waste your birth doing your own will, imposing your emotions on Him, and will spoil your life. In reality, if we know Baba's will, then He is indeed the true guru. We are eligible to say that Baba is our true guru. But if we do not will understand His teachings, His knowledge, His spiritual existence, if we do not know His feelings from us, what He expects from us, then how can He be our true guru? He would still be a wanderer because, in this play, He has shown that by respecting His will and following His orders, the wanderer becomes a true guru. because in Sai satcharitra it is mentioned guru appears, as Baba followed His advice to eat the roti and drink water, the guru appeared. A question should arise how did He appear? Was it a sage or a hermit type of person who suddenly appeared next to the wanderer? It's simple: as long as we are doing our own will, He is a wanderer But as soon as we follow His orders, He becomes the Sadguru. So, see, we are running in a blind race. We chant \"Satchidananda Sadguru Sainath Maharaj ki Jai\" loudly, but honestly, if we place our hand on our heart and ask ourselves if we truly know His will, if He is truly our Sadguru, the answer will be no. I am here among you to reveal this aspect of Baba. If we call Baba our true guru, we must have the power to know His heart without Him speaking, to know His will. And if that power is not there, then it is very unfortunate to say that He is not a true guru for us; He is just a mere wanderer. This is very painful. We just chant His glory but we don't know His heart, His yearning, His will, His order How is He our Sadguru? But in reality He is a Master of all universe but as we don't know His will thus we have made such a great glory as ordinary wanderer It's our foolishness and stupidity that we have brought such a glory to a level of wanderer If we truly want to know His will and follow His commands, there is no other way but through the Sai Satcharitra. If we can understand the Sai Satcharitra, if we can comprehend each of His Leelas, if we can grasp what message and teachings He wants to convey behind each Leelas, and what light He wants to bestow upon us, then He is our true guru. But if the light of the Sai Satcharitra is not in our lives, then please stop saying that He is our true guru. It's complete nonsense, rubbish, a false claim. Although we are not doing it knowingly, we are making this mistake unknowingly, but it is still a mistake. We are committing the sin of calling a wanderer our true guru. He will be our true guru when we understand His will, His feelings. I always give an example: Suppose there is a husband and wife. They have spent 40 years under one roof together. But if the wife cannot understand the husband's heart without him speaking, and the husband cannot understand the wife's heart without her speaking, what value does that relationship have? It is hollow. Similarly, our relationship with Baba is equally hollow because we lack the yearning of a true disciple to understand Baba's heart without Him speaking. So how can Baba be our true guru? We often say that Baba has said that if you worship me with any form devotion, I will accept your devotion and appear to you accordingly.\" but how many lifetimes are you going to hold onto this? Can you tell me once? When are you going to understand His feelings? Please tell me once that you intend to keep this for several lifetimes and have no intention of understanding His feelings. Then the conversation is over. Let me show you a scene; please watch it to understand that our feelings have no value. We need to change according to His feelings; that is true spirituality. Bringing Him down to our level by holding His collar is no great achievement. He easily comes down to our level. But greatness lies in Him remaining at His height while we, understanding His heart and will, reach up to Him. The greatness lies in that, not in dragging Him down to our level by holding His collar. There is a world of difference; do you understand? The difference is between earth and sky. The real point is that we should reach up to where He is, understanding His heart, and not drag Him down to our level based on our feelings.",
    "Description": "ओम साईं राम 🙏\nइस वीडियो में श्री साईं सच्चरित्र के अध्याय ३२ में वर्णित एक महत्वपूर्ण लीला को समझाया गया है, जिसमें बाबा और तीन अन्य साधक वन में ईश्वर की खोज के लिए निकलते हैं। बाबा द्वारा अन्न को ब्रह्म मानकर स्वीकार करने पर तुरंत ही गुरुदेव की प्रकटता होती है।\n\nसाईं बाबा स्वयं परब्रह्म हैं, फिर भी उन्होंने अन्य साधकों के साथ वन में ईश्वर की खोज क्यों की? आध्यात्मिक मार्ग में अन्न का क्या महत्व है? सदगुरु और भगवान में क्या अंतर होता है?\n\nश्री कृष्णाजी इस वीडियो में स्पष्ट करते हैं कि हमारे लिए साईं बाबा सदगुरु हैं या हम उन्हें एक साधारण बंजारा समझते हैं, यह हमारे दृष्टिकोण पर निर्भर करता है। जब तक हम बाबा की मर्ज़ी और उनकी इच्छाओं को समझ नहीं पाते, वे हमारे लिए केवल एक बंजारा ही रहेंगे। इसलिए, सदगुरु की मर्ज़ी को जानना और समझना अत्यंत आवश्यक है। साथ ही, यह भी बताया गया है कि हमारा आचरण हमारे ज्ञान से कहीं अधिक महत्वपूर्ण होता है।\n\nओम साईं राम 🙏\n\nOm Sai Ram 🙏\nIn this video, an important episode from Chapter 32 of Shri Sai Satcharitra is explained, where Baba and three other seekers venture into the forest in search of God. When Baba accepts food by considering it as Brahman (the Divine), immediately the Guru appears before them.\n\nSai Baba himself is the Supreme Brahman, so why did he join the other seekers to search for God in the forest? What is the significance of food on the spiritual path? What is the difference between a Sadguru and God?\n\nShri Krishnaji clarifies in this video that whether Sai Baba is our Sadguru or just a wandering traveler (banjara) depends on our own understanding. Until we comprehend Baba’s will and intentions, he remains just a banjara to us. Therefore, knowing and understanding the Sadguru’s will is essential. Additionally, it is explained how our conduct holds greater importance than mere knowledge.\n\nOm Sai Ram 🙏\n\n\nReference:\n\n🔴 Bharat - Janak Sawad Ramayan \n   • रामायण - EP 25 - राजा जनक का न्याय। भरत का...  \n\n🔴 Ek Bajara Gaye -    • Ek Banjara Gaye Jeevan Ke Geet Sunaye  | M...  \n\n\n\n\n#sai #explore #sadhguru #explore #comment #saibabablessings #jaisai #like #newgeneration #shirdi #like #newgeneration #peace #youtube #genz …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "10,419 views",
    "Likes": "474"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई संदेश श्री साई सच्चरित अध्याय 32 ओवी 161-163 / Sai Sandesh Adhaya 32 Ovi No 161-163",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_jqp_OVR_IY",
    "Transcript": "Countless salutations with reverence at the feet of all Sai devotees, Today, 26th March 2024, Sai's message for the day is from Shri Sai Satcharita, Chapter 32, Verse 161. Here, my Sai says - “My Master tells, Take away, Take away!\" that is, the treasure of spirituality. But everyone comes to me saying, \"Give me, give me!\" that is, seeking only the trivial desires of this world. What has He descended to bestow, and what are we paupers of fate asking for? There is no harmony between what He wishes to give and what we seek. And then, deeply afflicted, Baba says - \"No one wishes to understand my words, no one cares to feel the yearning of my heart.\" \"In this entire cosmos, there is not even a single soul who listens to me with true awareness.\" Shri Sai Satcharita, Chapter 32, Verse 162 - In this verse Baba entreats us: \"The treasure of my Master\" - that is, the spiritual treasure \"is overflowing in abundance.\" \"I call out - Bring empty carts, dig deep and fill them to the brim, and take it all away!\" \"Yet no one wishes to exert the effort, for the attainment of the Divine, to plunder this treasure of spirituality.\" \"I am weary, disheartened by these self-seekers devoid of true endeavor.\" Shri Sai Satcharita, Chapter 32, Ovi 163 - “I have grown tired of repeating again and again - ‘Dig into my inexhaustible spiritual wealth, carry it away in cartloads, plunder it freely.’ I possess this treasure in such boundless measure, perhaps you may grow weary of taking, but you will never be able to exhaust what I hold. Only the true child of the Mother, only the one genuinely thirsty for spirituality, shall plunder me completely and render me utterly destitute.\" \"And indeed, I live solely to be made destitute at someone's hands.\"",
    "Description": "🌼 \"The Master’s Treasure Is Overflowing – But Who Will Seek It?\" 🌼\nIn this deeply stirring message from Shri Sai Satcharitra – Chapter 32, Sai Baba opens His heart and reveals a divine anguish - while He offers the boundless treasure of spiritual wealth, the world continues to beg for fleeting worldly desires.\nA call to awaken from spiritual slumber, this is a reminder that Sai Baba’s divine grace flows freely - but only the true seeker, the one yearning for the Eternal, can receive it.\n🙏 Watch with reverence. Reflect with sincerity.\nLet us not just worship the Master - let us also understand what He truly came to give.\nOm Sai Ram\n\n🌼 \"मालिक अपना खजाना लुटाने को तैयार है - पर लेने वाला कौन है?\" 🌼\nश्री साईं सच्चरित्र अध्याय 32 के इस हृदयस्पर्शी संदेश में, साईं बाबा अपने अंतर की व्यथा प्रकट करते हैं। वे कहते हैं - जब मैं अमूल्य आध्यात्मिक संपदा भर-भर कर देने को तैयार हूँ, तब लोग मुझसे केवल तुच्छ सांसारिक इच्छाएँ ही माँगते हैं।\nयह वीडियो हमें साईं के उस आह्वान की याद दिलाता है, जो आज भी हमारे भीतर जागरण की प्रतीक्षा में है।\nसाईं का ख़ज़ाना आज भी उपलब्ध है - पर केवल वही पाएगा जो सच्चा प्यासा है, जो सच्चा जिज्ञासु है।\n🙏 श्रद्धा से सुनें, सच्चाई से मनन करें।\nसाईं को केवल पूजें नहीं - यह भी समझें कि वे हमें देने क्या आए थे। …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "1,408 views",
    "Likes": "172"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साईबाबा अपने माथे पर चंदन क्यों नहीं लगाने देते ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eW_GFxfXqOA",
    "Transcript": "Many people think that he was a Muslim that is why he did not allow application of Tilak on his forehead. This is people’s misconception, let me clear this. That was not the intention. Many people with this thought also ask this question is it because he was a Muslim he did not permit application of tilak? A question was asked. we visited Raju bhaiyya's home today there his brother asked a question Why did Saibaba not allow application of Tilak on his forehead? It is very well described in Adhyay 11. Many people think that he was a Muslim that is why he did not allow application of Tilak on his forehead. This is people's misconception, let me clear this. That was not the intention. Many people with this thought also ask this question is it because he was a Muslim he did not permit application of tilak? It is described in Saisatcharitra that whenever anyone went to apply tilak then Baba would blow away Puja plate with his hands. He used to get very angry. So, people were Scared. Only Mhalsapati used to apply sandalwood on Baba’s neck. To all the people Baba used to put forward his feet so people could apply tilak there and then leave. The question is why Baba did that? Why Baba did not allow anyone to apply Sandalwood on his head. At that time arrived a devotee by the name of Dr. Pandit and this has been mentioned in Adhyay 11. He came and stayed at Dada Kelkar’s place and both of them after bath took all materials required for worship and reached Dwarakamai, they came to Masjid and started worshipping Baba. He takes out Sandal wood from his plate, rubs it on his hand and applies it on his forehead. Everyone is shocked. What has happened today? All the devotees when they went towards Baba for applying Tilak Baba used to throw them away and they used to fall down far off and this person has applied Tripundara on Baba. The way it is applied on Shivji. And Baba does not utter even a word. Finally, Dada Kelkar who was a Brahmin devotee of Baba asked Baba why this inequality. You do not like us putting even a small Tilak on your forehead and this person has applied Tripundara and you allowed this to be done smilingly. Why this discrimination? Please listen carefully to the reply given by Baba. Baba says his Guru is a Brahmin and I am an unholy Muslim by caste. Dr. pandit’s Guru was a Brahmin and I am an unholy Muslim is what he, Dr Pandit believes. Dr Pandit thinks that Baba is Muslim because he stayed in Masjid (Mosque). But inspite of that, he thinks within that I am a Muslim, inspite of that the way he used to worship his Guru, he worshiped me in the same way. He saw his Guru in me his devotion to his Guru is so very great that even religion did not matter. His heart is so very huge it does not matter to him that I am a Muslim and he worshipped me as he worshipped his Guru and applied sandalwood, then not only me even Harihar Brahman would bow down his head, I am only an ordinary Fakir. It means that this leela tells us that our devotion has to be so high that if we believe Baba to be our Guru, we may stand in Church or we may stand in Gurudwara, we may stand in some shrine we should have the same faith as much as we have in Baba. This Leela teaches us this. This is the greatness of religion; this is what baba has given to the world. His devotion to his Guru is so very superior that not only me even Harihar Brahma has to bow his head before him. It means that religion did not come in the way. How great the people were and how great were their thoughts, people like Dr. Pandit. That is why I always say Dr. Pandit is that character of Sai Satcharitra, he is a great character all the other characters pale before him because that person had such greatness that he even broke the wall of religion. The wall of religion also needs to be broken, that also is a block, it is a wall and a very huge wall. Without this completeness is not possible. It is not possible at all. That is why Baba says that Mhalsapati has purity of mind, there is holiness but even then, he does not show the capability of moving out of Hindu religion. That is why he stopped at my neck but Dr. Pandit has same purity of mind like Mhalsapati but he even broke the wall of religion and that is why he reached my forehead. And if by knowing the depth of my heart he attains completeness he will reach my head and there will be not even a miniscule of difference between him and me. He and I will be one, he says this also. If anyone can take samadhi while in body for three days like me then there will be no difference between him and me. Now the fourth category. We spoke of three categories Head, neck and forehead. To the whole world Baba gives his feet, apply sandalwood here and leave. They are those people who have nothing to do with Baba, they only have selfishness in their mind and say Baba, Baba……. They are immersed in their selfish devotion, they have a list and they stand in front of Baba they do not bother to know Baba’s heart, Baba do this work, Baba do our that work. Baba take away these worries, Baba take away those pains, all those who connect with me in selfish way I give them my feet and I tell them that you are limited only to my feet you will never be able to raise yourself. Your status is limited to my feet so apply sandal wood and leave. That means he is showing the whole world that those who come with as much faith and greatness of heart they will rise high accordingly. This leela shows that. So you now decide whether you want to die clinging to Baba’s feet or you want to reach Baba’s neck or reach Baba’s third eye or you want to reach Baba’s Sahasra and become Baba. Now it is upto you but I have opened up the secret of this Leela. If you are chanting Baba’s name selfishly, you do not wish to know Baba’s will then Baba is giving his feet, apply sandal wood there and I know that you will never be able to raise yourself above these feet. Your status is limited to this. But one who comes with faith he will rise high up. That is why in our Shastras these chakras go upwards from Muladhar chakra to Sahasra chakra all go upwards, going upwards means going towards the sky which is all encompassing. You too become like that and rise high up. But if you want to cling to feet and die then you will perish, your wish. I want to say that. If after listening to this Leela in this crowd even if one person tries to rise above the feet then I will think that my coming to Sonipat was inevitable. one which apprehends mind, overcomes bane and calamities, annihilates ignorance, bestows deliverance, the ultimate source of welfare, truth awareness and bliss giver mother of Sai, direct form of Sai, diadem of all scriptures, glory to shree Sai satcharitra divine book",
    "Description": "This mysterious Leela of Sai Baba is connected to the incident involving Dr. Pandit, which is described in Chapter 11 of the Shri Sai Satcharitra. The video explains in detail why Sai Baba did not allow devotees to apply sandalwood tilak on his forehead, and why only Mhalsapati was permitted to touch his neck.\n\nThe video delves into aspects such as Sai Baba’s subtle consciousness, his mysterious behavior, and the spiritual eligibility required of a devotee.\n\n-----------------------\n0:00 - Introduction \n2:08 - Why Sai Baba refused devotees to put sandalwood on his head?\n3:50 - Saibaba's answer to act of Dr. Pandit\n6:50 - Why Mhalsapati only allowed to touch Sai Baba's neck, not his forehead?\n7:50 - 3 states \n10:00 - 7 chakra\n-----------------------\n\nश्री साई सच्चरित्र : अध्याय 11 डॉ पंडीत लीला\n\nसाईं बाबा की यह रहस्यमयी लीला डॉ. पंडित की घटना से जुड़ी है, जो श्री साई सच्चरित्र के अध्याय 11 में वर्णित है। इस वीडियो में गहराई से बताया गया है कि क्यों साईं बाबा ने भक्तों को अपने माथे पर चंदन लगाने की अनुमति नहीं दी, और क्यों केवल म्हालसापति को ही उनकी गर्दन पे चंदन लगाने की अनुमति थी।\n\nइस वीडियो में साईं बाबा की सूक्ष्म चेतना, उनका रहस्यपूर्ण व्यवहार, और भक्त की पात्रता की कसौटी इन पहलुओं को विस्तार से समझाया गया है।\n\n#saileelarahasya  #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzinsta #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #like #comment #share#explore #fyp #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #values #youtube#zili#shraddha#saburi #newgeneration#peace #saisatcharitra#young #corespirituality #saileelarahasya …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "9,530 views",
    "Likes": "523"
  },
  {
    "Title": "सब कुछ छीनो साई पर प्यार ना छीनो अपना - भावार्थ",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2lT7oOn_ULw",
    "Transcript": "The title of the song is \"Sab Kuch Cheeno\". Take away everything Sai, but do not take away your love. We have been dreaming of meeting you for so long. This is the anguish of a true thirsty heart. the one who desire nothing but devotion to the Baba. But the attachment to the world is not diminishing. He wants unwavering devotion of Baba but is also incapable of reducing attachment to the world. It is the pain of such person's heart, this song. Now he understands that until I overthrow this attachment, I will not attain the joy of Baba's devotion. Then, when his heart is crying, 'Sab Kuch Cheeno Sai'. It means he is literally saying that now I am not a person who will mend my ways according to your words. I cannot remove all my attachments by myself. I am not capable enough, Baba. Because I am stuck to this world. Therefore, snatch away the attachment of mine for the entire world, Snatch it forcibly. Because I cannot remove this attachment myself. It is not within my capability. That's why saying 'Sab Kuch Cheeno Sai'. It's all about snatching away, to snatch forcibly I cannot give it away. The feeling of giving has not yet awakened. I am in such a situation that my right hand is in the hand of my wife and my left hand is in the hand of my girlfriend. Girlfriend means the world The right hand is the wife, which is the Lord. so I cannot even let go what is in my left hand, which is in the hands of the girlfriend. give me as much bludgeonings of stick as you can, break me free forcefully, give as much trouble as you can, but liberate me from this as i cannot leave it. Baba, I do not have the capability to give it up. so, the hand with which i behold the world, my right hand is in your hand, my want is for you as well but along with the world You are desired with the pleasures of world I will proclaim ahead that you are desired only for the pleasures of worldly indulgence. Such people will not understand this song. those who use Baba only for enjoying the world, those who worship Baba, they will not understand this song at all. That 'Sab Kuch Cheeno Sai, par pyar n cheeno apna' Now, here the meaning of love is not to keep the attachment to the world and continue to worship Baba. There are 99% of such people in this world, but what is their condition? I have told you, the right hand is in the wife's hand, the left hand is in the hand's of girlfriend, You will have to leave your girlfriend i.e world then you belong to Baba then you are loyal to Baba. So, this girlfriend, the world, will have to be left. So, take everything away, O Lord, but do not take away your love. This is the story of that person who is stuck, who, on one hand, wants Baba but on the other hand, cannot leave the world. and Baba says.' Sai pasun shan hi vibhakt' means if one severs from Baba devotion even for a moment then how can he be called Sai devotee 'tyala kaisa mahanva charana sakt jo sansaari virakt ho nene' one who has not developed renunciation towards world If one has not attained detachment for the world and is still immersed in worldly attachments, how can he/she become a devotee of Sai? Now, here the person has realized that indeed, my devotion is not genuine because I have not been able to free myself from worldly attachments So, then the person is saying, \"sab kuch cheeno sai par pyar n cheeno apne.\" But do not snatch away your devotion from me. I myself perhaps can't offer you anything. I am trapped everywhere. I am trapped in as householder, I am trapped in family, I am trapped in the pleasures and luxuries of the world. I am trapped in the cycle of name, fame, wealth. I am caught up in desires for progeny, wealth, and worldly affairs. So, the scope of my entanglement is vast, Baba. And if I get a little time, then I say 'Sai Sai', or I visit Shirdi four times a year. And if I get a little more time, then I read a chapter from Sai satcharitra. The world revolves around the top priority for me, you are not there, Baba. You stand very low on my list, Baba that too I manage to give you time only if world leaves me. Otherwise, I don't have time for you because there is a lot of work at the top of the list above you - family, home, work, earning money, managing friends, and if the character is flawed, then there are outside affairs to deal with. There is so much to do, so many useless tasks that after those, if I get time, I sometimes manage to go to Shirdi for begging One lifetime is spent living like this, repeatedly coming to Baba and begging, ensuring the happiness and prosperity of my family. Baba has taken on the responsibility to do this work, that's why he has come into this world. pity him, he had no other work so settled in shirdi to give what devotees beg in front of him or who else is going to give them? Take everything away, Sai, but do not take away your love. Take away every aspect from my life, Baba, which is a roadblock for devotion towards you Take away every possession from me if it's not allowing me to engage in your exclusive devotion. Then, no matter what it is, now this devotee is preparing in a way to embrace renunciation Take away every possession from me if it's not allowing me to engage in your exclusive devotion. Then, no matter what it is, now this devotee is preparing in a way to embrace renunciation then these words are surging from his heart to snatch away everything If the feeling to say this has also awakened within, then the person is on the right path. He is on the right path All the pleasures of the world, I'm not interested anymore, I've seen the dream of meeting you, Baba Like a small stream from the Ganges, I emerged from Gangotri, I don't know how long the journey is to merge with ocean Like a small stream from the Ganges, I emerged from Gangotri, I don't know how difficult it will be to pass through stones, mountains but the destination is the Ganges. Like a drop emerging from Gangotri to merge into your ocean, but I don't know how long the journey will be, how many difficulties will come. I don't know, but if that drop falls into the ocean, it will be called the ocean. So, a drop has embarked to find the ocean So they are saying, \"We've been waiting for so long to fulfill our dream of meeting you. The day we meet you, Baba, life will become meaningful. So, take everything away if you must, but don't take away your love. We've been dreaming of meeting you for so long. Now there's nothing that appeals to me the ornaments of gold and silver We have left behind the clothes we wore and have come, forsaking the world. Now, there's no joy in these ornaments anymore because we have come into contact with something superior i.e your devotion The price of that devotion is so high that in front of it, these gold ornaments, these silver, these diamonds, these pearls, these bungalows, these cars seem meaningless, worthless. The essence of your devotion has now reached the tip of my tongue, now, nothing is enchanting The ornaments of gold and silver doesn't appeal the mind - Hence, Penance and austerity does this work it destroys everything, it removes everything. in that austerity, that strength lies. And after Baba makes one undergo through such penance, only then one can say that now nothing tempts the mind, having come out of the world, having discarded the jewels of gold and silver, shunning the worldly attire The world for which i used to worship you now i m leaving it it doesn't appeals me now only one thing allures that is steadfast devotion to you with your unwavering devotion, it feels alive. And if your devotion is not there, then it feels like a corpse is roaming in this world. It seems like that to the devotee. Now look, there's another thing here, many people misunderstand this a lot - 'ab kuch n maan ko bahye sone chandi ke gahne' 'duniya se nikal aye hai hum tyag ke vastr pahne' - many people feel that it means to renounce the world wear the clothes of renunciation, hold the water pot in hand and walk on. these lines are not said with that intentions It is not about renouncing the world but to renounce the attachment to it Both are different instances. Those who leaves world hastily are not able to leave the attachment for it To abandon the world is the work of a moment isn't it? with a twitch you have hurried, you got excited, then you can leave the world in a moment. But leave the attachment of the world and show it in a moment. It is one thing to leave the world and it is a different thing to leave attachment to the world. People always deceived. They talk about leaving the world. There is a couplet of Kabir ji that 'tan ko jogie sab kare, man ko na koi no one actually asceticize mind, whereas there are tons of people who asceticize body It doesn't take a moment to wear that ascetic attire because body is to be asceticize not mind made a get up, left the house and became a jogi (ascetic) The world is renounced world is not easily abandoned, you feel that you have renounced but world has not shunned you It is inside you and is there 24 hours a day. On the contrary, after coming in the get up, you will go outside and will do more lucrative things. earlier it used to be less, now its scope will increase, so, these Lines are quoted very wrongly, we have come out of the world wearing the clothes of renunciation, so it does not mean that to run away from the world. we have to live in the midst of the world, we have to live in the midst of the family, yet we have to remain separated from them, Wearing the robe of renunciation does not mean that we have made some get-up and we have left the worldly life because There are some problems at home, so now I am leaving to search for God, I am leaving for a big work, so leave this world now, enough is enough, these people are not supporting me, so remove them If you do such trivial actions then you lack tolerance and if you are running away from home so fast, then wherever you go, you will run away because you have no stability in you, you have no strength to bear it and a Remember that all the people in the world who have achieved that perfection 99% of the high souls those who have achieved that perfection have always had discord in their homes. They are the ones who have reached that stage but have not left their homes. nor did they leave family Renouncing the world means renouncing selfishness. How can individuals be renounced when you are entangled due to past life connections? Because of these connections, one is a father, a brother, a mother, a wife, or children; these connections are not trivial. It is because of these connections that one becomes a wife, a husband, or a progeny. Renouncing them under the guise of momentary excitement or for some grand search is not a noble act. you are deceiving yourself and others. It doesn't mean renouncing the world, your family, your world, and going to the Himalayas. Nothing is accomplished by it. You can leave the world in a moment, but the world doesn't leave you in a moment, It takes time. That's why, while staying amidst family, minimizing your selfishness gradually, and living for them, dying for them, keeping your self-interest aside every moment, is the real treasure. Remember, living amidst family isn't easy it requires the strength to overcome selfishness. That's true renunciation, the real renunciation. So, now nothing makes your mind attracted like gold and silver ornaments means i am not attached to anything. But I am amidst everyone. Just like a lotus that blossoms in the mud but rises above it. Consider this world as mud, but I have risen above the mud like a lotus. Baba says in the 10th chapter, 'dasa nu das mi tumcha' to whom He is saying? to His devotees I don't think any guru of the world would have ever spoken such words for his devotees. These words are coming directly from Baba's mouth, \"I am your servant and it's your compassion because of which i can have the vision of your feet\" \"I will found myself blessed if i am born as worm in your faeces 'Why has Baba said this? First of all, Baba used to see every living and nonliving as the embodiment of truth and bliss. For him, neither am I a guru nor are these disciples; as I am complete, they are also complete. Only the remembrance of their true nature has been forgotten. Apart from that, they are also complete. This devotee considers himself a devotee, but if you look at Baba's perspective, he is as complete as I am. And I am receiving your blessings, this is my destiny,\" He says. And He also says on the top that even if I become a worm inside your broom if lord keeps my existence as such even then I will consider myself blessed. It means how much Baba is seeing this world with perfection, holiness, and joy, it is understood from this. This world is not bad. It is complete, holy, perfect, and joyful. It's just my mind that needs purification, my sight needs to be clear so that I can see it. So if these are Baba's words, then what's the point of renouncing this world? Then what's the point of renouncing the family? Here, the meaning of these words is not that we leave the world and wear the attire of renunciation. It does not mean to get out as a ascetic, rather we fall out of attachment, but while falling out of attachment, we still live amidst them(family), filled with love, So, you've come out of the world, detached yourself, and are living amidst them filled with love so that you can share that love with them. This is the work of a coward, felt a little pain hence had to leave the world. He also renounces the ultimate truth. How can a person who renounces the world abide to the path of spirituality? It's more dangerous than this, as dangerous as fire We select and bring the buds, we select and bring the buds, take the garland of as offering. Well, which buds are they talking about? We have picked buds, take these offering. Just give us a little bit of the light of your sight. So, this person is saying that my attachments, wherever they are trapped, my mind rejoices in household affairs, in my wife, in my children, in eating and drinking, in wearing clothes, so wherever I am trapped, whether it's the pride of knowledge, the pride of beauty, the pride of wealth, so I'm trapped in all these places, so from wherever my attachments are trapped, from there I'm picking those as flowers/buds. We select and bring the bud. Take it's garland as offering. So, wherever I am trapped, from there, I'm picking those attachments as flowers and removing them, and making a garland out of them and putting it around your neck. What could be a bigger garland than that? The garland we buy from the shop and put around His neck, it's worthless after hearing this line who do they call a garland, they're defining it. so these flowers are not plucked from any garden. These are the flowers that you expect, the garland you want to wear. I am plucking those flowers, Baba. Until today, I used to give you a shop-bought garland. Today, you realize that you are not pleased with that garland. You desire a different garland. And today, i have learned how that garland is made. So, countless flowers have to be picked, and those flowers are wherever my mind is trapped, I pull it back I plucked a flower from where I am trapped in household affairs. If I get trapped in money, I pluck a flower from there. If I get trapped in beauty, I pluck a flower from there. If I get trapped in fame, I pluck a flower from there. If I get trapped in knowledge, I pluck a flower from there. If I get trapped in desires and vices, I pluck the flowers from there. If I was enjoying the pleasures of the five senses, then I also plucked those flowers. I have gathered all these flowers, made a garland out of them, and now I am putting that garland around your neck. And I know, for births, you have been desiring this garland. You were never satisfied with the garlands brought from the shop; that became evident today. And he said, \"Look, if I am doing this work according to your mind, then please also consider my mind a little, let my devotion increase little by little. Day by day, let that devotion grow. So, isn't this a give and take relationship? We pick and choose the blossoms, take a few for offering, just give me a little bit of the light of your sight. And now my prayer is, my request is, Baba, grant me your real sight little by little, make me deserving of that sight, shower your grace upon me. Because the desire You had for the garland, I chose all those blossoms and made a garland, and put it around your neck. Now be pleased, Baba, and let my devotion increase day by day and worldly desires diminish. Worldly attachments should decrease, leaving the world shouldn't be necessary. so this was third stanza Now look at the fourth stanza. There's a storm heavy on the head and the boat is rocking. Keep showing the shore with the oars of protection. And ever since I embarked on your path. There is a storm heavy on the head. What storm is this? Do you know the biggest storm in this world? The storms that come due to climatic conditions, they are nothing compared to that storm. It strikes once and is done. Okay, the storm came, we sank, no problem. But the actions that are not of worth doing happen every moment, the deeds that I involuntarily commit, those storms are dangerous. Because they pollute my soul. If the external storm comes once and submerges, then it's ok Master But these storms that come repeatedly, when my mind races towards wrongful deeds even though I don't want to, and when those wrongful deeds happen against my will, then before such a storm, the external storm is nothing. So he says, when such storms come, So at that moment, O Lord, I pray to you to hold my hand, to save me in that moment from committing sins There's a heavy storm on the head and the boat is swaying, and in those moments, my life's boat completely wavers. My faith wavers completely I become helpless many times, when I commit actions I shouldn't, so at that time, hold my hand. Become the oar of protection at that time and take me to the shore. Bring me to my destination because I've faced such storms many times in my life. So at those moments, O Lord, hold my hand, save me, and take me to the shore. So this is a prayer that comes from a sincere heart. That's why I'm saying that there's a storm heavy on the head and the boat is swaying. It could sink at any moment. Let me ask you, haven't we all, sitting here, experienced such moments? There must have been some moments in everyone's life, one or two moments, that evoke tears of regret when remembered, thinking, \"How did this happen to me? This shouldn't have happened. so, no one is here who has not passed through this state no one who has no stains on them So in those moments when I slip, when the possibility of my downfall increases, O Lord, come into my life as an oar and oar means which guides boat in the right direction, come as an oar and help me cross over There's a storm heavy on the head and the boat is swaying. Keep showing the shore with the oars of protection. Lead me to the shore and help me cross over. now last stanza Every breath is your worship, every heartbeat is your song when the purity of the heart is achieved. When the dirt of the mind is washed away, then after that, every heartbeat becomes His song. His worship is in every breath. It means taking a breath is his worship because now it's not the body, now he has made a place in the mind's temple, and even for a moment, their memory is not forgotten. I have attained their unparalleled devotion. Therefore, every heartbeat, every heartbeat is singing your song. When I breathe, I am worshiping you. It means I don't have to worship you separately. I don't read songs separately now. When my heart beats, your song is playing, when my breaths are running, your worship is happening. The entire worship of the world is absorbed in You In this way now, for me, it's as if all the doors of the world are closed. I'm not shown anything, just your feet are visible to me, and your devotion is shown. Apart from your unparalleled devotion, world doesn't appeals me So, this song is attempting to say that I have not attained your unparalleled devotion, so the world seems better. The poison of world that i m drinking as the elixir because I haven't tasted the real elixir of your blissful devotion If I taste devotion once in bliss, then how will I be able to look back at the world? So, Baba, please be merciful, taste the elixir of your blissful devotion once so that I don't look back at the world. This is an attempt to say, 'Take everything away, Sai, but don't take away your love. Since when we have been waiting to meet you'.",
    "Description": "Om Sai Ram 🙏\nIn this soul-stirring talk, Krishnaji takes us beyond melody—into mantra.\nLine by line, stanza by stanza, He unpacks the inner essence of a powerful devotional song ‘Sab Kuch Chino Sai’. What might seem like poetic praise on the surface transforms—under His guidance—into a deep, meditative exploration of bhakti, surrender, and self-realization.\nKrishnaji doesn’t just explain the words—He reveals the living truth hidden within them.\nWhether you’ve sung this bhajan for years or are hearing it for the first time, this satsang will transform it into an experience. It’s not just about understanding the song… it’s about letting it enter your heart, awaken your devotion, and draw you closer to the Divine.\n🙏 Let every verse become a mirror.\nLet every note become a step inward.\nLet every meaning unfold as darshan.\n\nॐ साई राम 🙏\nइस हृदय को झकझोर देने वाले सत्संग में, कृष्णाजी हमें सुरों से, मंत्र की गहराई तक ले जाते हैं।\nपंक्ति दर पंक्ति, चरण दर चरण, वे एक शक्तिशाली भक्तिगीत ‘सब कुछ छीनो साई’, के आंतरिक सार को खोलते हैं।\nजो केवल एक काव्यात्मक स्तुति जैसा प्रतीत होता है, वह उनके मार्गदर्शन में एक गहन, ध्यानमय यात्रा बन जाता है—भक्ति, समर्पण और आत्मबोध की।\nकृष्णाजी केवल शब्दों का अर्थ नहीं बताते—\nवे उन शब्दों में छिपी जीवंत सत्यता को प्रकट करते हैं।\nचाहे आपने यह भजन वर्षों से गाया हो या पहली बार सुन रहे हों,\nयह सत्संग उस भजन को एक अनुभव में बदल देगा।\nयह केवल समझने का विषय नहीं—\nबल्कि उसे अपने हृदय में बसाने, अपनी भक्ति को जाग्रत करने, और ईश्वर के और निकट आने का निमंत्रण है।\n🙏हर पंक्ति एक दर्पण बन जाए।\nहर सुर एक अंतर्मुखी कदम।\nहर अर्थ एक दर्शन बन कर प्रकट हो।\n\n#sai #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #like #comment #share#explore #fyp #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #values #youtube#zili#shraddha#saburi #newgeneration#peace #saisatcharitra#young #corespirituality #saileelarahasya#viral …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "11,951 views",
    "Likes": "545"
  },
  {
    "Title": "क्या सच में साई के आगे सभी अन्य मूर्तियां छोटी हैं ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iIuJrCQOfY8",
    "Transcript": "This is a very important aspect of Sai Baba's teaching. But the problem is that this teaching is not within our reach. What's more, it's not even within the reach of the whole world This is the specialty of Sai Baba. Our Baba is with such a big heart. There is a question which always comes in our mind, that is the devotees of Sai Baba, they keep the idols of Sai Baba so big And in front of them, idols of our Lord Ganesha, Lord Hanuman, and Lord Rama are place very small in comparison, at their feet. what kind of equanimity will this be called? This is a very important question, a very good question. Because when it comes to equality, here you have elevated Sai Baba above Lord Rama, Lord Ganesha, and Lord Hanuman, and you have diminished the idols of Lord Rama, Lord Krishna, by placing them at their feet. That was their question. Look, the answer to this is very simple if you are open-hearted enough to understand it. When we read the Devi Bhagavatam or scriptures about Mother Shakti, it repeatedly shows that the Trimurti, whom we refer to as Brahma, Vishnu, and Mahesh, are taking refuge at the feet of Mother Shakti. So, when we read the Devi Bhagavatam, the image of Mother Devi is elevated so high that it is portrayed that the other 33 crore deities are at the feet of the Mother. Why is this shown? Similarly, if you read the Vishnu Purana, the image of Vishnu is depicted as the greatest. It is elevated very high, and the other 33 crore deities are shown as secondary, diminished in stature, His greatness narrated. Likewise, if you read the Shiva Purana, Lord Shiva is depicted as the greatest personality, and the other 33 crore deities are shown to be scattered at his feet. What does this mean? Why is this so? Didn't the sages and saints have the knowledge of equality? That there should be unity among all deities? The sages and saints were aware of this, but the narrative is written according to the devotee who considers their deity as supreme, If the Vishnu Purana is written for the devotees of Vishnu, then the Devi Mahatmya is written for the devotees of Devi. And similarly, Shiv Purana has been written for the devotees of Lord Shiva. If his devotees read, if that much greatness is not written, if that much greatness is not described, then how will our faith be strengthened? This is true, isn't it? If you people have read the Devi Purana, then Maa Shakti Jagdamba has been seated so high that along with Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesh, 33 crore Gods and Goddesses are also seen at her feet. The reason for such compositions is because those scriptures, like the Devi Mahatmya, are for the devotees of Devi. So, their worship is empowered, their devotion strengthened. Simply through this sentiment, their power is elevated to the highest stature, while everyone else is diminished. So, for devotees of Sai Baba, the image of Sai Baba is the greatest. In front of them, for us, Lord Rama, Krishna, and Hanuman might seem lesser. This requires a broader perspective, a vastness of heart to understand. If we try to understand it with a narrow mindset, we won't comprehend even in millions of lifetimes. Because here, there's a discourse happening for the devotees of Sai Baba. The Sai Satcharitra is written for Sai devotees, so naturally, it describes the greatness of Sai. It's a very simple thing, but if you view it with a biased perspective, you will find it very disrespectful. for a devotee of Sai Baba, He is supreme. In front of Him, the 33 crore deities are depicted at the feet of Sai Baba. Just as for a devotee of Devi, Devi is supreme. For a devotee of Rama, Rama should be supreme, it must be, because if it's not, their faith could waver. It must be, I'm putting a condition here. For a devotee of Rama, Rama should be supreme. For a devotee of Krishna, Krishna should be supreme. For a devotee of Hanuman, Hanuman should be supreme. This is called steadfast devotion, if you maintain this sentiment towards your chosen deity, it's a good thing and it should be there. But when does the problem arise, do you know? The problem arises when someone, let's say, is a devotee of Sai Baba, but then a devotee of Rama, or Hanuman, or Shiva comes before them. when we praise Sai Baba in front of them, Baba has been derogated this. Baba says this as the greatest sin when someone else's devotee comes before you,. for that moment, you should take your chosen deity aback His worship, in which deity it resides, should be discussed, Baba has taught us this. If you indeed have the capability to speak. If he is a devotee of Lord Rama, then speak words about Lord Rama in such a way that his faith and devotion towards Lord Rama increase, then you are a true Sai devotee. Not a single word should come out of our mouths that would shake his faith. If we call ourselves true Sai devotees. This is true Sai devotion. If a devotee of Krishna comes, then only the words of the Bhagavad Gita should be spoken. Only the stories of Krishna's Leelas should be discussed. Sai Baba should not be brought into the picture there. Baba has never promoted this. Baba has shown so many Leelas, there are countless Leelas in Sai Satcharitra where, by appearing in the form of those in whom one's faith was placed, thereby strengthening one's faith. There are countless such Leelas. So if we consider Baba as our Sadguru, then we should not make this mistake even unknowingly. If someone who is a devotee of Radha Rani comes and sits in front of you, then if you have to praise, then only praise about Radha Rani should come out of your mouth. If you have knowledge! If you have the power to enlighten them, then you will talk only about their deity, and strengthen their faith. And if you don't have that capability. If you don't have knowledge about their deity, if you don't have that much knowledge, if you don't have that much devotion, then you will remain silent, but you won't play your Sai Baba's tune there. I hope you understand my feelings. And if you are also playing your Sai Baba's tune there, then you have not understood Sai Baba. Then when will you understand His vast teachings? One master for all. Religious tolerance. The world is one family Then these slogans. We will never understand these slogans. It means simply that our devotion towards our deity should be paramount, but when we come face to face with someone else's deity, then our deity should take a back seat, should step back. This is true devotion, this will bring stability in society. This is what Sai Baba has taught us. Such greatness is in Sai Baba. No, maybe the felt bad that you people do this, make Sai Baba great but then the other gods and goddesses become secondary. No, it's not like that. For a Sai devotee, Sai Baba will be everything. But until someone else's deity comes in front. Until then Sai Baba is paramount for us, but as soon as someone else comes, like a devotee of Lord Rama comes and sits in front of me, or a devotee of Lord Shiva comes and sits in front of me. I will speak beyond that If an Islamic person comes and sits in front of me, then if I have knowledge about Islam, if I know the verses of the Quran, then I should only talk about the verses of the Quran with him, I should not play my Sai Baba's tune there. Similarly, if a Christian person stands in front of me, then if I have the wisdom of the Bible, if I know the teachings of Jesus Christ, then I should strengthen him by talking only about those things in front of him. So this is the reality of true spirituality. Baba has given this teaching to everyone, and if you don't have that much knowledge, then please remain silent, but don't try to show your deity great in front of them. This is a very important aspect of Sai Baba's teachings. But the problem is that these teachings are not in our hands. What's more, it's not even within the reach of the whole world. This is the specialty of Sai Baba. Our Baba is with such a big heart. So if every person understands these fundamental teachings, then will blood ever be shed in the name of religion? As much blood has been shed in the name of religion, it has never been shed for any other reason in this world. History is witness. But if every person, every human being, understands these teachings of Baba, that our devotion towards our deity should be paramount, but when someone else's person of another religion, another path, another sectarian person, another deity comes in front of us, then our deity should take a back seat. If such clarity comes, then there will never be bloodshed in the name of religion. My religion is big, yours is small This filth will never surge The problem is that we ourselves have not understood our own religion properly. When does fanaticism thrive? When we do not understand our own Vedas properly. When we ourselves do not understand our own Quran properly, when we ourselves do not understand our own Bible or the teachings of Jesus properly, fanaticism does not arise just by seeing the oppression of others. It arises due to not understanding our own religion properly. Remember this. If we understand our religion properly, if I am an Islamic person and I understand the Quran properly, then I will interact with other religions with great tolerance. If I am a Christian and I understand Christianity's Bible properly, then I will not look down on other religions. And if I understand my Vedas properly, if Vedanta is clear to me, if the Bhagavad Gita is clear to me, then I will never look at other religions with a lowly eye. Fanaticism arises in humans when they look upon others with disdain, which is due to lack of self worth in them Then, we will always keep finding faults; we will find their faults, they will find our faults, and this has been going on for centuries and will continue for centuries. This will never stop. So, when they asked that question, I felt it was appropriate to address it. Alright, It's understandable that as long as our devotion is limited within us, Baba is supreme for us. But as soon as the time comes for someone else's turn, that's when our Baba should step back. This is the teaching of Sai Baba And I hope you all understand it well. If the world truly understands Baba's teachings in the right direction, then the world's turmoil will be resolved. If everyone truly believes that this teaching is the only Sai Baba, then I consider all of you Sai Baba here. Therefore, every talk of mine begins with Millions of salutations at the feet of all the Sai devotees present here. So, every person here is Sai Baba. What you are hearing today, it is your moral responsibility to convey this teaching to the entire human race and it is your moral responsibility. Then, the original Sai Baba will manifest before the world. Otherwise, today our duplicate inclinations have made Sai baba duplicate. For us, Sai Baba means only our list of desires If Sai Baba fulfills the desires on that list, then glory to Sai Baba and the day when He stops fulfilling it we will stop worshiping Sai, and someone else will be taken over Such people will never understand this teaching. It is impossible. Okay, if anyone has any questions related to this topic, please go ahead. my question was, you said that for a person from another religion instead of giving some empathy about Baba we should say something about his deity which he believes But if in the same place, that person speaks about his istdevta, and while he speaks about it, we also express solidarity with him, praising his istdevta, but if he criticizes our Baba at that time, what should we do? first of all it's not praising. It's wrong word, It's not praise, it's the right glory. If it comes from your heart and is based on true feelings, then it will never let any kind of envy arise in his mind towards your deity First of all, it is impossible. So, what will happen if he does come? This question is baseless. If there is genuine tolerance towards the religion of the other person in your heart, genuine love, genuine empathy, and if something good is coming out from within you even after that, and if he still speaks something wrong about your deity, then first of all, he is not a human being, and why to entangle with such person one should leave from there with folded hands o enchantress, remover of curse and troubles, the destroyer of ignorance, the bestower of liberation, the giver of ultimate welfare, the embodiment of truth, consciousness, and bliss, mother of Sai, Sai incarnate Glory to the divine scripture of Shri Sai Satcharitra.",
    "Description": "#sai​ #saibaba​ #jaisai​ #shirdi​ #shirdisai​ #youth​ #genz​ #genzyoutube​ #spiritualism​#millennials​ #instagram​ #trending​ #like​ #comment​ #share​#explore​ #fyp​ #saisatcharitraleelas​ #saidarshan​ #values​ #youtube​#zili​#shraddha​#saburi​ #newgeneration​#peace​ #saisatcharitra​#young​ #corespirituality​ #saileelarahasya​#viral​ …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "6,869 views",
    "Likes": "486"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई को ये नाम कैसे मिला ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=89eZuc1YlUQ",
    "Transcript": "Not just Chaand Patil's horse, but we've all lost our horses. How did an anonymous person got Sai as his name ? The story is such that the Muslim named Chand Patil Whose mare is missing and for two months is continuously in search for her Searching for her he lives Aurangabad and walks towards Dhoopkheda his village in disappointment and dismay he won't find the horse And their around 8 to 10 kilometres from Aurangabad he sees Baba sitting under a mango tree and Baba calls him There as well that man did not go on his own. Baba had called him Then Baba asked him, \"why he is so troubled what's the matter?\" so he says disappointingly, \"what can I say my horse is lost And for two months I have been making efforts to find it but was unsuccessful, the horse was not found. Then with a heavy heart he stands before Baba and says this. Baba says, \"what's the deal in this there in front is a drain. your horse is just there. Go and check. on checking horse is found. For that guy it was not less than a miracle that ordinary ascetic knows everything now whenever you read this story you all might have felt that chaand patil is the third person is merely a character but I say that every person sitting here is chand patil not only Chand patil's horse but our horses are lost too and that horse is our mind we have lost our mind as soon as the mind enjoys the dirty drain of six vices and five subjective senses it is swayed away from us. we lose it And that mind of ours is lost through many births we reborn again and again to win over it but could not achieve it in any one of the lifetime We could not get the horse even in one lifetime so every person sitting here is Chand Patil Tukaram maharaj in his abhang says,\"tuj ahe tuj pasi pari jaga visarlasi\" so Baba told that look it's this close, there is just a need of sadguru to guide in your life he would make Sai appear within you No need to look for anywhere else. \"where do you search for me? I'm right beside you\" Why do you search me anywhere else? I'm right beside you rather within you instead you are not even there it's just me in your place. Baba will say this further So not only the horse of Chand Patil is lost but our horses are lost as well every man is plagued by his own mind. Every man has lost his own mind, his mind is wandering in the world, family and this world, family are the dirty drain because there you are connected their through attachment if selfless love flows for world and family then it can't be dirty drain it's a fountain of elixir if you are trapped in house on the basis of attachment if you are trapped in family on the basis of attachment if you're trapped in society on the basis of attachment if you're trapped in whole world then it's a dirty drain And Baba showed him the mind drinking filthy water of the drain In 39th chapter, Baba says to look at the ignorance of your mind and at that very moment it will stop drinking the filthy water of that dirty drain And towards my nectar of knowledge, it will turn itself. So every person of this world is chand patil here. Till today we felt that Chand Patil is a devotee whose missing mare was recovered by Baba So we all have lost horse too. Our mind is wandering too. Within us our mind is not at peace. To show path to that wandering mind I have been incarnated Such has Baba said indirectly through this Leela I have only one purpose to restore your lost mind I'm not come to fulfill your desires that work can also be done by my Maya Mayapati's job is not to give Maya but to liberate from my Maya So I have come to stabilize your wandering mind again. I come to deploy it back to its original place I have come to retrieve the lost horse to you. This is the mission of my incarnation \"moko kaha dhunde re bande mai toh tere pass me\", You search Kashi, kaba for me You search me in abstinence and fasting you search me in mosque and temple but I'm beside you Just you understand my heart and act accordingly you would find me one day within you But for that you will have to understand my wish you have to live accordingly Look in Vedanta 3 words manolai, manonash and Manojai are mentioned. Understand this perfectly and what charitra says about Baba that Baba had from 18 years of his age had complete victory over his mind. Victory over mind means victory over maya. Because mind is another name for Maya. Maya is not somewhere else she is present within us in the form of our mind Sue what is monolay, Mononash and Manojai ? All the meditative techniques that are taught today in the world All the sects, all the lineages everybody is talking about meditation and in today's date it is extremely prevailing Focus, concentration, meditation So world knows only about manolai that is to calm the mind. They give some technique and make sit for two hours It only settles mind. Neither is mind annihilated nor it is won. So manolai is first stage at the second is ManoNash and on the third is ManoJay Manolai means when you have acquired the strength to sit in meditation for one or two hours then that is manolai And that calmness of mind will diminish as the two hours of meditation is concluded. Mind will retreat back to its original form The flaws within it are not eradicated then whether it remains two hours or two years in the state of deep meditation The impulses of mind, the vices of mind, the impurities of mind do not diminish hence it is called as manolai but people feel two hours of discontinuous meditation is the pinnacle. This is misunderstanding Don't make any assumptions that someone who sits in meditation for two hours is an accomplished individual but after the cleansing of filth inside the mind, after the restlessness of the mind subsides, after executing karma yoga, after passing through the nine folds of devotion When mind becomes pure and inert, and is composed in supreme soul then it is called manonash After that the mind is destroyed people like Ramana maharshi comes in this category Mind is totally destroyed and there is no scope for eruption of resolution and choices neither good nor bad One has embraced Divinity. But in manoNash Maya has left the person but for competent Sadguru like Baba charitra says that He had victory or maya from 18 years of His age He had triumph over mind. So, it is far higher stage than Manonash So those who have complete control over their mind who have won their mind who have victory over maya can stabilize any mind by finding it How to tell this one thing I had to tell those three The one who has won their own mind can control any others mind, he can grip it firmly in constraint and can stabilize it If he himself has not achieved victory how will he make others mind stable? Om Sai Ram, \"bandhe ko bandha mila chute kon upay, kar sangat nirband ki pal me le churai\" Kabir Ji says that every disciple is tied up with the bondage of attachment, illusion, mind tendencies, vices of mind, pride and ego But if the guru he seeks refuge in is also tied up with the same bondage who has devotion of informative knowledge but has dropped of experience How can he liberate any disciple from the bondage of ignorance? Therefore kabirji says, To associate with a true guru who is not entangled in any kind of bondage and he will liberate you from the all of bonds of ignorance in an instant So here I have come to retrieve the lost horse I have come again to reunite you, I have come to stabilize your lost mind. This is an attempt to say in this Leela. Then the Leela continues further. Chaand patil is already deeply impressed and affected by baba's divine presence that he is not ordinary human but a divine soul. Baba says, \"come sit here in the shade you have worked very hard\" Baba removes smoking pipe he then strikes the ground with tongs and from there sparks emerge He puts those sparks into the pipe. When water is needed to wet the cloth , he strikes the tongs again and water comes out He wets the cloth, wraps it around the pipe and then smokes it and also offers it to Chaand patil So look offering chillim to chaand patil here doesn't necessarily mean that Baba himself smoked the pipe and offered it to his devotees to smoke This is not the case. Because this story says that Chaand patil's mare was retrieved by Baba, Meaning he has also reached that same divine state Which is why he also has the right to smoke the pipe. One who has conquered the mind only he deserves to smoke the pipe not before. Neither at Manolai nor at manonash Only the one on whom Manojay has occurred will have the connection with the pipe in their life and you all remember Manojay means tattvagyan, one who has elemental knowledge. Again i will bring back that topic. Baba was Tattvagyani He has reign over all the five elements. Let's understand chilim perfectly, what is chillim? Chillim is made out of soil and in that you toss a fireball with tobacco so from 5 elements earth and fire are included To wet the cloth you have used water. so water is also included And now, Baba has placed the Chillim on his lips and as he inhales drawing the life force from within so presence of wind is there And when He blows the smoke fills the entire sky. It means that all five elements resides within the Chillim and holding the pipe in hand signifies that He has grasped this five elements in his fist I take them inside me in one puff distorted form of these five elements, their enormous form, their ignorance, their tamas And in other puff I leave outside his devotion, knowledge and renunciation So this is the entire philosophy of chillim First of all, everyone has to understand it well that Chillim is not for everyone Baba has been portrayed in a very disgraceful manner First at-least you reach manolai then we'll contemplate, reach till the destruction of mind No! Baba used to do therefore we will do so i always say baba also used to put his hand in scorching utensil (handi), he also used to remove his intestine and spread it over tree to dry he used to cut his body into pieces and then again unite them. please do all this and then you smoke the pipe You can't do this then you don't have the right to smoke pipe nor acquired power over five elements nor mind is conquered but an ordinary person whose mind has not yet purified says that Baba used to smoke Chillim, that's why I also smoke so for him its an intoxication to smoke Chillim but for a competent Sadguru like Baba its opposite of intoxication that is 'prestige' to smoke Chillim so for a omnipotent Sadguru like Baba is a prestige so please don't compare with Baba And now, as the topic is how an anonymous person got the name 'Sai' The wedding of Chaand Patil's nephew takes place, and because the bride is from Shirdi, Baba come to the village of Shirdi. along with wedding procession After three years of austerity(Deep meditation)in Shirdi, Baba had disappeared, and exactly after a year later, Baba returns to Shirdi During that time,there used to be farming in the courtyard of the Khandoba temple under a big tree which is still present there in the shade of that tree, all the wedding guests would disembark from their bullock carts, and among them is this young ascetic, who is now 20 years old. Until Baba, being in Shirdi for three years, known as Bal Faqir. Not even Bal Faqir, but was addressed as young boy(balak) because in the fifth chapter it comes that Baba wears that Muslim-like attire, which comes much later in the story. So that young boy, remained completely silent, didn't answer anyone for three years. Suffered heat, cold, and all weather conditions he remained immersed in austerity(Deep meditation). This is what the Sai Satcharitra narrates. However, after three years, he disappears, lives anonymously for one year and then reappears under the mango tree in Aurangabad. And now that bal faqir Saying Bal Faqir would also be incorrect; i would say that young boy. Upon seeing the young boy getting off from the wedding procession and heading towards the Khandoba temple, the priests of Khandoba, for the first time, addressed a young boy by the name of \"Sai\". And this is how Baba acquired the name Sai. It means that Baba did not choose the name himself; it emerged from the heart of a priest of Khandoba \"Come Sai,\" I would like to take two verses from the 5th chapter, verse 24, it's very important. If i don't take the verses, the confirmation won't be complete 'Sai avinash puratan, nahi hindu na yavan, jaat paat gotrhin, swarup jat nijbodh its been cleared that Indestructible and ancient that Sai is even this world too is made after Him. He is that ancient This means he is older than the universe itself. Because even the universe came into existence after that element. He is even older than the universe. It is clarified that he is neither Hindu nor Muslim. That's why I always say, if Baba exists, then he belongs to all religions, and if not, then belongs to none. Some people are engaged in proving Baba' as Hindu, some are engaged in proving Baba' as Muslim, that's their illness, with them. But Baba, who has his originality, is neither Hindu nor Muslim, he is an ancient element. He is the Supreme Brahman, so ancient that even this universe came after him. He is beyond all lineage, caste, clan and religions, and whose essence, the true form, the original form, is the light of the soul, which has always been complete, that is Sai, was, is, and will remain. Because he is an eternal element, and then as stated in a verse further it becomes clearer that how an anonymous person got the name Sai. 'sai sai mhanti je jan' As the world addresses him as 'Sai' 'te tari kai namabhidhan Was this name given to him by this parents? No 'ya sai mhanuni bahumaan, purassr sambodhan je te he' When he was called 'Sai' by mhalsapati with great respect, it was as if the entire universe calling him saying 'come sai'. It wasn't just Mhalsapati, it was as if the entire universe called out to Baba, 'Come Sai,' and then That's how he got the name Sai this is how he got the name 'Sai' And you see, Sai is a Sufi name. The meaning of a Sufi name is that a Sufi is a person who treats all religions equally, loves everyone equally. Such a person is called a Sufi. And that very name was called out from mhalsapati by whom none but the Supreme Soul, But I don't understand, today on social media, negative propaganda is spread about Baba, why they do it, that's not known. They have made sai baba Chand Miya there is a deep relationship between Baba and Chand Patil because his horse was lost, and Baba reunited him with his horse by finding it. Now, using this leela, because of connection with chaand patil, Baba was Chand Miyan, was a Pathan, came from that country, and whatnot Be cautious of such videos They are spreading negative propaganda with very corrupt motives. It's unclear what they aim to gain. But why to tease such a great personality.? Amidst all this, I don't know where these Chandmiya have come from. Sai Baba is not Sai baba he's Chandmiya!. The topic was how an anonymous person got the name 'Sai'. As I mentioned, Baba's incarnation mission is to lead us to ourselves. He has come to reunite us with our lost horse. He has come to stabilize our wandering minds and to re-establish the element of knowledge within us. So, his purpose is indeed profound. But amidst that what are we doing? Instead of going to Baba and asking for treasures, we are asking for garbage. I have written a few lines, let me complete today's topic with them. Please listen carefully to these lines. I desire to distribute diamonds and pearls, Baba is saying my desire is to distribute diamonds and pearls, but unfortunately, your nature is to ask for stones and rocks. I have a thirst to offer you the ocean of joy, but unfortunately, your stubbornness is to drink the sea of sorrow. Now, what else can I do but feel helpless? Amen, amen, this is all I can say. May it be so, may it be so, this is all I can say. This is a very precious hymn of Kabir Ji. 'Where are you searching for me, O friend? I am right beside you. Where are you searching for me, O friend? I am right beside you Where are you searching for me, O friend? i am not in pilgrimage neither in idol nor in solitude Not in the temple, mosque, or Kaaba or Kailash, 'Where are you searching for me, O friend? I am right beside you.' Not in the temple, mosque, or Kaaba or Kailash' where are you searching for me, O friend? I am right beside you.' Just a while ago, I explained that Tukaram Maharaj also talks about the same thing. You already have what you want , you are just searching it in a wrong place. If you look within you have the universe, and Sai itself. 'You have searched for him everywhere outside, some search him in temple and some in mosque or some search him in kaaba and some in kailash i do not reside in them in reality i reside in the chamber of your heart Just awaken yourself, and you will find me. 'Where are you searching for me, O friend? I am right beside you.' Not in pilgrimage places, not in idols, Someone recently asked me a question that if one resides in a sacred place like Shirdi, and if they perform sadhana there, their merits multiply manifold. What is your opinion on this matter? I said, 'What opinion can I have? This fact has been confirmed in many major scriptures by prominent saints. If someone resides in a holy place, performs spiritual practices there, then the rewards multiply many times over.' But along with this, I would like to add one more thing here: it doesn't end here. By saying this much, you cannot escape your duties. Even if you perform 10% of virtuous deeds in such a sacred place, you receive rewards a hundredfold because the significance of that place is such that even if you do 10% of good deeds, 10% worship, 10% spiritual practice, God turns it into a hundred percent. This is true. But along with this, there is another truth: if you reside in such a sacred place and if you make mistakes, if you stray, if you perform misdeeds, then the consequences of that also multiply manifold. But nobody wants to grasp this aspect, nobody wants to talk about it. Humans are so selfish that they accept only what suits them, So if you perform 10% good deeds in holy places, they give back 100% rewards, sacred sites. But if you commit any wrongdoing or mistakes there, the punishment is also infinitely multiplied, this should not be forgotten either. You are only looking at one side of the coin, there is another side too. \"Na Teerath Mein, Na Moorat Mein\" I am neither in any pilgrimage nor in any idol, meaning here it is to say that I am not limited to just that extent, do not take it as he is not present there. It means I am not limited only to pilgrimage, I am not limited only to idols, I am beyond that. And if you only limit me to that extent, then you have confined my scope, you have confined me. If I am in your destination, then you have confined me, then you can never be limitless. \"Na Teerath Mein, Na Moorat Mein Na Ekant Niwas Mein\" I am not only in solitary retreat; I am also amidst the crowd. That's why it is said that there should be a spontaneous state of meditation, not just sitting in one place and meditating, that is just the initial stage. But spontaneous meditation is when one remains in a meditative state, 24 hours, behaving like everyone else but still not losing inner tranquility, that is called spontaneous meditation. And it is applicable only to great enlightened masters like Baba, even great scholars cannot attain it. \" Na Teerath Mein, Na Moorat Mein Na Ekant Niwas Mein Na Mandir Mein, Na Masjid Mein Na Kabe Kailas Mein\" I am not limited only to temples or mosques, I am not limited only to the Kaaba or Kailash. I am beyond that as well Don't just limit me to that extent. \" Na Main Jap Mein, Na Main Tap Mein Na mein vrat upwaas me\" Na Main Kiriya Karm Mein Rehta Nahin Jog Sanyas Mein\" I am not only in chanting, I am not only in penance, I am beyond that. The more you chant, the more you practice penance, you will realize that there is something beyond this. This does not mean that you should abandon all these practices. No, when Kabir Ji said, \"He is not in these,\" he was not saying it to everyone. He was addressing those who have exhausted themselves by engaging in all these practices and yet haven't touched the essence. It is an attempt to make them understand that, \"Brother, all that you have done was necessary, but just by doing these, you won't reach the ultimate truth.\" Otherwise, if you interpret it incorrectly, it could lead to a big problem, and then Kabir Ji might be misunderstood. \" Na Main Jap Mein, Na Main Tap Mein Na Mein Barat Upaas Mein Na Main Kiriya Karm Mein Rehta Nahin Jog Sanyas Mein\" And I do not dwell in rituals nor do I dwell in worldly actions; nor I reside in renunciation and yoga It's not just that I have taken renunciation; it's not like I have touched its essence. Those who renounce the world, they leave it behind, but the world doesn't leave them. The irony lies in the fact that the world leaves them, it's a different matter. You can leave the world behind in a moment, but the world doesn't leave you. So the day the world leaves you, that day you become renunciant. And the ability to free oneself from the world lies in the enlightened master; he liberates. \" Bande ko Banda Mila, chute kaun upaay, seva kar nirband ki, jo pal me lei chuday\" Serve the one who is free from bonds, who can liberate you in an instant. So the purpose of saying this is just that you should not limit Him only to temples, mosques, fasting, rituals, and worship; it is beyond that. But they are necessary; in the beginning, all these things are necessary, but as you progress, you will realize that it is not just about these. Eventually, you will understand that you need to lose yourself. If I show the strength to lose myself, then I will attain it. Even after doing so much, if the sweetness of diminishing ego has not yet awakened within you, then you are far from God. Despite fasting, practicing yoga, renouncing, you are the poorest of the poor because the sweetness of diminishing has not yet awakened within you Here, the moment you diminish your ego you attain oneness with God. But if you keep fearing death, then all these practices are fake, they didn't work, you didn't go in the right direction. All these practices prepare you to die, they give you the strength to die, they increase the sweetness of diminishing ego, you start enjoying it. There is a famous couplet by Kabir Ji: \" Jin khoja tin paiya, gehre paani paith, mein bapura budan Dara, raha kinare baith\" Whoever searched in the deep waters and found it by diving in, sitting on the shore, they never found God. And here, if you want to leap into the ocean, you need to be prepared to drown. Only those who dive with the readiness to drown emerge alive. And the one who sits on the shore fearing to die, they never attained anything, nor will they ever. So if the sweetness of diminishing hasn't awakened then your entire effort is in vain, your entire worship is in vain because all these practices, all this worship, if they couldn't generate that sweetness of diminishing within you, then you have missed the mark, you have lost your way somewhere. Then the destination is still far away, and the goal remains untouched. \"Khoji Hoye Turat Mil Jaoon Ik Pal Ki Talas Mein, Kahat Kabir Suno Bhai Sadho Mein To Hun Viswas Mein\" Here,”Khoji\"(searcher) refers to the awakening of the desire to dissolve, the awakening of the sweetness of dissolution. It means if the desire to dissolve arises within, meaning if He desires to dissolve and you are prepared to dissolve, only then will you reach the state where you can attain God. And the one displaying the strength to dissolve is actually showing the false 'self', the false 'ego'. The false 'ego' must die if you want to bring the true 'self' to life. While holding onto the false 'self', the true 'self' does not come within reach. So, this is the essence, that's why I always say that the sweetness of dissolution, the true spirituality, means the sweetness of dissolution. So all these practices, all these worships, all these fasting rituals, all these actions, all these renunciations, are to be done only for the purpose of dissolution The whole world shudders at the mention of death; it begins to tremble as soon as the name of death is spoken. Have you ever thought why it trembles? Everyone fears death because their desires and ambitions are so vast. The more desires and ambitions one harbors, the greater the fear of death they experience. And as many hopes, desires, attachments to home, to children, if while living, you cut the thread of attachment by worshiping God. Then the fear of death flies away from your mind while living, otherwise they say that Yamraj drags you away forcibly. You don't want to go, but they take you forcibly. They snatch you away from this world. So if you want to go willingly, then while living, by increasing devotion to God, by increasing worship, you have to break this tangle of attachment. Then the fear of death will end on its own, will end while living. You will go into the arms of God as a child runs and hides in his mother's lap, similarly in death, you will run into it. Because while living, all your desires, all attachments, all wishes have ended. Then death will seem very beautiful to you. But if all these things are there, attachment to the world, to family, to children, to home, to the body, then death will force you to shiver moment by moment, it will frighten you. So he is saying, \"Khoji Hoye Turat Mil Jaoon\" If one is a true seeker, seeker here doesn't mean someone searching externally, but someone who has the power to eliminate themselves. \"Turat Mil Jaoon, Ik Pal Ki Talas Mein\" If you showed readiness to dissolute, you became, here you disappear and there you become. \"Kahat Kabir Suno Bhai Sadho Mein To Hun Viswas Mein\" And one should have the belief that \"O Lord, I desire to dissolve by Your hands and only wish to dissolve through Your sacred hands; there is no desire left in me for anything else in this world.\" On the day you dissolve with such pure sentiment, you will become the supreme ruler of infinite universes. That's why there is a saying of Jesus, \"Whoever desires to live, is killed every time.\" Listen carefully, this is the essence of the entire Vedanta, in this one saying of Jesus. \"Whoever desires to live is killed every time, and whoever maintains the power to lose this life while living, attains eternal life.\" So, I conclude this discussion for today.",
    "Description": "✨Adhyay 5 (Ovi 6-30)✨\nIn this insightful and devotional talk, Shri Krishnaji unravels some of the most iconic and spiritually significant incidents from 4th Chapter of Shri Sai Satcharitra:\n🌿 Chand Patil's Lost Mare – Discover the deeper symbolism behind the story of Chand Patil’s missing mare and how this divine encounter became a turning point in recognizing Sai Baba’s miraculous presence. This talk also delves into key questions such as:\n• What is the deeper meaning behind the mare in the Chand Patil story?\n• Was Chand Patil merely an external character, or does he represent something more within us?\n• What is the difference between Manolaya, Manonasha, and Manojaya—and what is their relevance on the spiritual path?\n🔥 The Chillum Episode – Listen to the mystical tale of how Baba kindled a chillum without fire or fuel, revealing his mastery over the five elements and hinting at the ageless yogic powers he embodied. Shri Krishnaji further clarifies:\n• What is a chillum, and who has the right upon it?\n• Why did Baba offer the chillum to Chand Patil?\n🚩 How Sai Baba Got His Name – Explore the moment when Baba first arrived in Shirdi and was welcomed with the name \"Sai\" by Mhalsapati – a seemingly simple gesture that carried profound spiritual meaning.\nShri Krishnaji not only recounts these stories but also draws out their inner Vedantic essence, helping seekers connect with Baba’s divine nature beyond just the events.\n✨ A must-watch for devotees and spiritual aspirants seeking a deeper connection with the Leelas of Sai Baba.\n🙏🏻Om Sai Ram🙏🏻\n\n---------------------\n0:00 Introduction\n0:29 Chand Patil's Story\n2:34 Who is Chand Patil? Significance of his lost mare\n6:14 Purpose of Sai Baba's incarnation\n8:01 Manolai, Manonash, and Manojay\n----------------------\n\n✨अध्याय 5 (ओवी 6-30)✨\nइस ज्ञानवर्धक और भक्तिपूर्ण प्रवचन में, श्री कृष्णाजी श्री साईं सच्चरित्र के चौथे अध्याय की कुछ अत्यंत प्रसिद्ध और आध्यात्मिक दृष्टि से महत्वपूर्ण घटनाओं का उद्घाटन करते हैं।\n🌿 चाँद पाटिल की खोई हुई घोड़ी – चाँद पाटिल की घोड़ी के खो जाने की कथा के पीछे छिपे गहरे प्रतीकात्मक अर्थ को जानिए, और कैसे यह दिव्य भेंट साईं बाबा की चमत्कारी उपस्थिति को पहचानने का एक महत्वपूर्ण मोड़ बन गई। इस प्रसंग के माध्यम से श्री कृष्णाजी इन गूढ़ प्रश्नों को भी उजागर करते हैं:\n• चाँद पाटिल की घोड़ी की कहानी का गहरा आध्यात्मिक अर्थ क्या है?\n• क्या चाँद पाटिल केवल एक बाहरी पात्र हैं, या वे हमारे ही भीतर के किसी पहलू का प्रतिनिधित्व करते हैं?\n• मनोंलय, मनोनाश और मनोजय में क्या अंतर है, और इनका साधना के पथ पर क्या महत्व है?\n🔥 चिलम की कथा – जानिए वह रहस्यमय प्रसंग, जब बाबा ने बिना आग और सामग्री के चिलम सुलगाई, और पंच महाभूतों पर अपने अधिकार को प्रकट किया। यह बाबा की दिव्य योगसिद्धियों की झलक देता है। श्री कृष्णाजी आगे स्पष्ट करते हैं:\n• चिलम वास्तव में क्या है, और उस पर अधिकार किसका है?\n• बाबा ने चाँद पाटिल को चिलम क्यों दी – इस साधारण लगने वाले कार्य का आध्यात्मिक अर्थ क्या है?\n🚩 साईं नाम की प्राप्ति – जानिए जब बाबा पहली बार शिर्डी पहुँचे, तो म्हाळसापती ने उन्हें \"साईं\" कहकर संबोधित किया। यह एक सहज प्रतीत होने वाला क्षण वास्तव में गहरा आध्यात्मिक अर्थ समेटे हुए था।\nश्री कृष्णाजी न केवल इन घटनाओं का वर्णन करते हैं, बल्कि उनके अद्वैत और वेदांत के दृष्टिकोण से भी अर्थ खोलते हैं।\n✨ यह प्रवचन उन सभी भक्तों और आध्यात्मिक जिज्ञासुओं के लिए अत्यंत लाभकारी है जो साईं बाबा की लीलाओं के गूढ़ रहस्यों को समझना चाहते हैं।\n🙏🏻ॐ साईं राम🙏🏻\n#saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #shirdisaibaba #saisatcharitra #spiritualism#millennials #saileela #saibabateachings #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #youtube #shraddha #saburi #spiritualwisdom #krishnaji #bhaktipath #vedanticwisdom #chandpatilstory #saibabachillum #saiarrivalshirdi #innerjourney  #divinegrace #saikripa #saidevotees #saispiritualtalk #corespirituality #saileelarahasya #trending #like #comment #share #explore …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "4,834 views",
    "Likes": "311"
  },
  {
    "Title": "सिर्फ ५ रुपयों में पाइए \" ब्रह्मज्ञान \" !",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cnns4q1HqZU",
    "Transcript": "When it comes to worldly matters, he doesn't like any shortcomings. But when it comes to spirituality, then man becomes very dishonest. Only one path is enough in that remembrance of the name is enough, then this language truly doesn't make sense. When it comes to spirituality, why do we stoop to such a low level Om Sai Ram. There is a story of five rupees in the sixteenth chapter of Sai Satcharitra. The story is like this: One day there was a believer devotee who was always engrossed in accumulating wealth. Hearing Baba's fame, he set out to go to Shirdi with the desire to attain Brahma knowledge. When his friend came to know about this. So he scolded him and said that it is simply impossible for a greedy and stingy person like you to get the knowledge of Brahma. Despite that, that believer devotee, on the return bid, reached Shirdi with a hired horse and took darshan of Baba and said, Baba to grant him the attainment of knowledge of Bramha. Then Baba said, don't worry at all, I will give you the knowledge of Brahma because all the devotees associated with me demand only worldly and mortal things. Among the millions of devotees, someone like you comes to me with the desire of knowledge of Brahma. Saying this, Baba asked them to sit and talked about this and that called a small boy and asked him to go and borrow ₹5 from Nandu Marwari for me The boy went immediately, but Nandu was not at home. That child came to Baba and told him the whole truth. Then Baba sent him to Bala wani. This time too the child came empty handed because even bala was not at home. Then Baba sent the child to two or four more other places, but from nowhere he could get Rs. 5 At this, the seeker of Brahman started saying to Baba, \"Baba, I have hired a horse for the return journey, hence I cannot stay for long.\" Please give me spiritual knowledge as soon as possible. Then Baba started telling him that whatever I did for so long was only to get you Brahma but your greed for money is so much. That despite having 50 times the amount of ₹5 in your pocket, it wasn't possible for you to lend me just ₹5. So, for a money-minded person like you, attaining divine knowledge is also only impossible. Friends, in this story, Baba is asking for which ₹5, and how do we have to offer those ₹5? We will shed light on this in today's episode, Om Sai Ram This 16th chapter is like the heart of Sai Satcharitra Because this chapter brings us closer to purpose for which this scripture was created the knowledge Bramha First of all, If the details regarding the attainment of Bramha are not there in any book then that book cannot be Prasadhik. And this is a prasadik scripture. Its purpose is for every human to attain divine knowledge. So, in that sense, this chapter is the heart of the Sai satcharitra. And the seeker here, the person who is present in Baba's court with the curiosity of attaining divine knowledge, is none other but we, because having the curiosity of divine knowledge is one thing and having a true thirst for divine knowledge is another. So, there is a deep difference between such two individuals. Having curiosity about Brahman or not fully understanding its depth. This is one kind of person, and another person is the one who, understanding its full depth, reaches a court with the thirst for it. So, maybe that person didn't have the full depth and reached shirdi upon hearing that Baba is the divine manifestation who instantly grants the attainment of Brahman. He, with this understanding, attends Baba's court with curiosity. as a child was made to run around for borrowing ₹5 and through that Baba was saying that \"Despite having 50 times more amount in your pocket, you couldn't give me a mere ₹5?\" How can a person so greedy attain enlightenment? This naturally comes to the forefront in this Leela. He was blinded by greed, and Baba exposed that there. That's apparent, \"but until you give me those ₹5, I cannot grant you the attainment of Brahman.\" What Baba is saying there is of great importance, there's a verse i'll take it maybe it will provide more clarity Verse number 73, Baba says,\"bramha lagi panch pran, panch panchendriya gyan, ahankar budhhi mann, lagti samrpan karavaya\" So, the ₹5 that Baba is asking for are these in implied sense meaning the five organs of action and the five organs of knowledge should be offered to Guru these contributes to one rupee and the second rupee is the five vital airs. And the mind: the third rupee, intellect: the fourth rupee, and ego: the fifth rupee. So, this adds up to ₹5. So until we don't give these ₹5, it's impossible for any SadGuru to grant us the attainment of divine knowledge. Now the question is how to give those ₹5? The five pranas are such that if I take out the five pranas from within me and keep them aside, then I won't survive. Firstly, how do I give them? And then giving away the five senses of knowledge means not taking out the eyes, not taking out the ears, which is natural, so how do we give? What he is asking for, he has just made it clear that you have come to ask for knowledge of Brahma not even self-knowledge, Brahma knowledge means ultimate. The elemental knowledge which is higher than self-knowledge is called Brahma knowledge. Meaning that you have come with the expectation of ultimate realization and you cannot give ₹5 and you do not have the ability to give these five things, nor can you give Panch Prana. You can neither give me Panch Panchendriya gyan nor can you give me mind, nor can you give intelligence, nor can you give me ego and unless you are capable of giving me this ₹5, then you cannot be entitled to Brahma Gyan, now the question is that how will we give the Panch Pran which is being talked about? When we are fighting with ourselves. We are fighting with our senses, we are fighting with our mind, when we are fighting with our sin, we are fighting with our mistake, when we see our mistakes and when we are working hard on it. then despite our best efforts, those mistakes keep happening again and again. So a kind of regret. A kind of suffocation: Whenever that mistake happens, a true person, a person with faith, feels suffocated. As if I am losing my life or I have made this mistake, I am trying my best but still I am making this mistake, so that suffocation of regret, where I feel like losing my breath, I would call it offering of five vital airs Because until such a deep thirst has awakened, until the level of remorse has not reached such an extent where you start suffocating where you start feeling that living this life with such felonies is not acceptable to me and until that feeling that Regret of a level where it starts suffocating. I mean, that person is not yet worthy of giving five lives. So this is what giving away five vital airs actually means. That suffocation. That mistake is happening again despite every effort. So that yearning, ache in the heart, has to be given to Him in the form of Panch Praan and any Sadguru, He will keep in his sight only such a person who has so much truth and sees his ignorance. And working on it. So in that sense is the surrendering of Pancha Prana. Now this second rupee is the attachment we have towards the five subjects - sound, touch, form, taste and smell. Every human being is trapped in the attraction of these five senses. It's as if he/she is alive only to indulge in these five senses. And Baba is asking the offering of the same pleasure. Will you be able to sacrifice the power of those five subjects for my sake? Can you eliminate these five senses from your life? If you put effort into it, with complete honesty, then you have given me the second rupee. So, this is the second rupee. Pancha Panchendriya Gyan. and the third is the mind. Now, the senses were related to the enjoyment of objects, so it was about giving those objects. Therefore, the second rupee, which we call it, was given. Now the third mind gets entangled in the choices of thoughts, the mind gets entangled in the 6 vices like lust, anger, greed, attachment etc. These subtle negative emotions negative. These all together is mind. Can you offer all these 6 vices to me and drop the resolutions of life? If you have the strength to do both of these, you will eliminate the instability of your mind. If you have the strength to do all these, then you will be able to give me the third rupee, that is the mind. In this way, the third rupee will be given and then the fourth rupee, intelligence, which is the ability to reason. Is the intellect, which is normally present in every human being, will you be able to offer it to me? Will you be able to surrender the power of decision-making of the intellect to me if time comes because, after reaching the top level, one has to dedicate all their understanding to discernment as well, but after reaching a very high level, do you have that much preparation? they are asking through the fourth rupee, whether you will be able to offer me the power of decision-making that resides in the intellect. Because there comes a time when both righteousness and unrighteousness have to be eliminated. Sarvdharmaan parityaj Which Krishna says, but when did he say it? On reaching the eighteenth chapter he said, He has not said it till chapter 17, means that after reaching on the pinnacle, one has to surrender his entire intellect to him \"so are you ready for that,\" he is asking through the fourth rupee. And then the fifth is ego. all the four rupees that were offered before live on it. It's pride that is the cause of the five vital breaths, it's pride that is the cause of the five sensory perceptions, it's pride that is the cause of the mind, and it's pride that is the cause of the intellect. because if there is anyone who is the creator of all these, it's the ego, meaning I, the body consciousness So, will you offer even that to me? In other words, offering pride directly means if I want to eliminate you. So, are you prepared to be eliminated? because ego is the cause all the four He asking for the root, existence. Are you ready to die for me? That is ego. So in this way, unless you have the ability to give me this ₹5, you cannot be entitled to the knowledge of Brahma. very nice. So this thing Baba had told clearly through ₹5 So unless any person is able to give this ₹5 to any Sadguru, then he cannot have the right to know Brahma, then this applies to us also, it is not about that person. We keep calling Baba as Sadguru but do we really have the strength to offer that ₹5. we have to check it If we have the strength to offer ₹ 5 and if our sadhana (spiritual practice) is being done with that attitude then only we are on the right path, otherwise we are stuck in the itch of the spirituality This question will probably be in the minds of many, why so much hassle if one wants to achieve the same destination by following a single path? Bur first of all in the verse that you said now He did not say there that even if you reach there through any one path, you will attain Brahman. That is not there. He only said that the dimension of those four paths is different. They complement to each other. In reality, one path leads us there, this feeling is not expressed. This might be a misconception for many people. They complement to each other. If you delve into karma yoga, you will eventually transit to bhakti yoga. If you are truly practicing karma yoga, then? And if you are practicing bhakti yoga, you won't even realize when you have transited to gyan yoga. when you have commenced with yoga. so they are complement to each other not negating but However, definitely, the path of karma appears different on the surface. Bhakti yoga appears different, but in reality, they complement each other. Now, look. What am I saying, Before we delve into this topic, if we examine our existence this existence is made up of three powers. One is the power of action, the second is the power of desire, and the third is the power of knowledge. Now, for the power of action, there is this body, the senses, movements, efforts, waking up, sitting down, speaking, doing, all together forming the power of action And the second is the power of desire, meaning emotions. When emotions arise, the heart is engaged, emotions come forth. When feelings arise, that is another dimension or aspect of existence. The third is power of knowledge, understanding, knowledge, these three aspects together form a complete entity. So, if even one aspect remains incomplete, we will become disabled. From one perspective, the powers of action, desire, and then knowledge karma, gyan, and hakti yoga—straightforwardly, meaning the Creator has designed it in such a way that all three are still functioning 24 hours. We are just not able to grasp They are functioning together, hand in hand. That's why, in this chapter, there is a Verse no 167. Where. I'll take that verse-'mal vikshep ani avaran, aise tri doshi antakaran, nishkaam karme mal nirmulan, vikshep shaalan upasana' and futher says-'svakarm ani upasana karita, paripakvata yete kartya chya chitta, mal vikshep nirmul hota , avaran shesh ta rahate' 'te he sarva anarth bijavaran, nasuni jate prakta gyan, hota raavi prakashman, jevi nirasan timira che So, he have told that this existence is filled with three defects filled with impurities, filled with distractions, and filled with sheaths and the impurities within us are removed through selfless karma yoga. They are indeed talking about that. It means selfless karma yoga also required. Distraction-It is purified from worship, it means devotion and meditation yoga are also required to remove distractions, to eliminate the instability of the mind. And third is the veils, it is cleared by gyan yoga If you expect complete knowledge of Brahman, then you will have to be proficient in all schools of thought. It is a human instinct that when a person is living in this mundane world, he desires everything. He wants all kinds of pleasures, cars, mansions, the luxuries of the world. If he's just sitting down to eat, he wants all sorts of delicacies When it comes to worldly matters, he doesn't like any shortcomings. But when it comes to spirituality, then man becomes very dishonest. Only one path is enough in that remembrance of the name is enough, then this language truly doesn't make sense. When it comes to spirituality, why do we stoop to such a low level So there Bargaining takes place there. In reality, sometimes many people raise questions. hy has God said that one gets divine experience as per one's feelings then one taking support of this saying suppress others Hey man, it is okay if He has said that one gets divine experience as per one's feelings So in reality, out of compassion, he has come down to our level and said that thing, 'this guy has not awakened that much thirst yet, so it is okay, at least I will come down to his level and say, okay brother, your feeling is right. But at least keep it alive and for such is the vow. But if we think that by quoting it, this is just one way to know Brahma, if we accept it like this, then we will be deceived, This is His greatness and the most important thing of taking support of this vow is that Sadguru is descended down by me to my level But when I give the five rupees that they are demanding in this chapter, I reach where He is, so this is a difference So I hold him by the collar and bring him down to my place or I work hard to reach him where he is sitting. if i gives him ₹ 5, after knowing his heart, if I behave accordingly. If I reach there then I will also become complete as he is complete. And if not, if I take these words then I will bring him down to my level. But there will be a world of difference. That's why in our scriptures, four types of liberation have also been described. like Sāyujya-mukti, Sālokya-mukti, Sārūpya-mukti, Sāmīpya-mukti, Sārṣṭi-mukti. Why were those levels mentioned? And the roles of knowledge are said to be seven as the Seven Levels of Wisdom, if we see it very deeply in it, then in the end I will speak only that in the thirty-second chapter, Baba says one will reap as one sows the more hard work one does, the more one is faithful, the more one will get and the more effort one will do one will reach that point, he can get that fullness. If we understand Baba's heart, if we can give what they are asking for, if we can control our senses, stabilize our breath, with the support of that suffocation if we can eliminate the wavering of the mind and offer our determined intellect at their feet, and show readiness for dissolution, through which we will surrender our ego to them, then only we will reach where he is. I feel like this is the essence of the entire chapter.",
    "Description": "सिर्फ ५ रुपयों मे \"ब्रह्मज्ञान\" !\n\n\n#sai #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #like #comment #share#explore #fyp #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #values #youtube#zili#shraddha#saburi #newgeneration#peace #saisatcharitra#young #corespirituality #saileelarahasya#viral …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "3,799 views",
    "Likes": "313"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साईबाबा कुश्ती में हार गये ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JD9lAKmhqhs",
    "Transcript": "Those who want to get success should get that much success in this mortal world, but the one who is a true devotee of Hari, should always face setbacks and defeat in his life. Om Sai Ram. In the fifth chapter of Shri Sai Satcharitra book, there is a story of wrestling in which Baba himself plays. So, there is a wrestler named Moideen Tamboli in the village and as you must know, Baba also led a wrestling life in his youth. So due to some reason, there was some discord between Moideen Tamboli and Baba and they got involved in wrestling and Baba loses in that wrestling and then Baba feels that he has been insulted and he leaves the village and if anyone asks anything then only he replied or else be quite then Krishna ji, there are many questions in the mind one that Baba himself is an incarnation, he plays wrestling, this thing is not understood. The second thing that is not understood is that when they play wrestling, he lose. If this is said in truth then it cannot be digested. The third thing is that after losing wrestling, he gets humiliated, so he feels so humiliated and insulted and after that he leaves the village. So all these incidents, the common man's thinking seems to be that is this the truth or is it some printing mistake? If it seems so then please throw light on it. There is absolutely no printing mistake. When Baba orchestrated the creation of this scripture, his intention was to convey these divine plays to the common people, and to impact their lives. Therefore, many times, he has tried to set examples before us by enacting these divine plays upon himself. Until this understanding is grasped, such questions will continue to arise. Meaning, he has often lowered himself to such humble states so that we can gain a better understanding, enlightenment. His profound impact on our lives is why he has, many times, descended from his supreme state to enact such divine plays, ensuring that his influence remains in our lives. Before delving into this divine play, I would like to begin with a couplet by Kabirji where he says, 'harijan toh haara bhala, jeetan de sansar, haare toh Hari se mile jeete yam ke dwar' So, losing sometimes is essential in life, as Kabir Das Ji says. He says that a true devotee of the Lord is better off always losing. 'Harijan toh haara bhala' And let the rest of the world win as much success as they desire in this impermanent world. However, for a true devotee of the Lord, let them always face setbacks and defeats. And he says, \"The reward for losing is to be with the Divine, while the one who wins goes straight to the gates of Yama (the god of death). One becomes the food of this impermanent world. Kabirji expresses profound truths here, and Baba has exemplified these couplets in his life. The first thing here is, what does losing mean? See, this life is the transient world. The more success I achieve in it, the more my ego will inflate. Naturally, if the owner (God) has bestowed beauty upon me, I would want to capitalize on it. If the owner has made me wealthy, I would want to live life to the fullest. If you understand, in life, I would want to take full advantage of whatever the owner has blessed me with and by getting stuck in these things, I will only enhance my ego (body consciousness) But understand, if the opposite starts happening, if I start facing setback after setback, then my ego will gradually diminish. And if there is any true purpose of life, it is the diminishing of the ego so that the awakening of the soul may increase. If I ask you about the weight of the kurta you are wearing right now, what answer would you give? It would be in a few grams. Let's assume it weighs 50 grams. Now, if I tell you to take off this kurta and throw it away, can you do it? It would be difficult. It's difficult, but if the Lord gives me strength and I increase the weight of your kurta to 50 kilograms, would you then be able to take it off and throw it away? Then, yes, I would take it off immediately. Losing means filling life with difficulties so that it becomes easier to let the ego fall. And as much success as we get, as much as everything starts happening according to our mind, the lighter the burden becomes, the more we enjoy wearing that kurta. So, this is what such a defeat is. That's why Baba is saying that when he loses, he falls outside the village. That defeat takes him out of the village. Being taken out of the village means it places him in dispassion, freeing him from all worldly attachments. It takes him to solitude where there is an end to all duality. So, Baba attains that state. So, this is such a defeat. There is another couplet by Kabirji where he says, 'Sadguru sacha surma, nakhshikh maare pur, bahar ghav na de sahi,bhitar chaknachoor' He says the true guru is the one who doesn't show wounds externally but thoroughly cleanses from within. He's called a true surgeon and he strikes right from the hair on the head to the nails on the feet, he thoroughly cleanses. And only after receiving those setbacks, the attachments to the world diminish. Because the weight of the shirt increases. And as soon as the weight of the shirt increases, then this egoic shirt can be easily removed by a person; otherwise, he will never take it off. So, this is such a profound thing that Baba has given us in the form of light through this Leela. Those setbacks, those failures lead us towards renunciation. This, I believe, is the biggest essence of this story. Very nice Krishna ji, such a beautiful explanation has been given by Krishna ji on this. Earlier the question was asked that Baba loses, but after listening to this explanation it seems that Baba has won and He is eager to make us win too. They also give us the way to win. After this I remembered a line of Swami Vivekananda. Take risk in your life, if you succeed you will lead, but if you fail you will guide and through this it becomes clear that Baba is our spiritual guide and to give us this guidance Baba did not even think that If I lose, I win, Baba has also given us a message in this way that we should not have any preconceived notion of anything in our mind. And regarding the body mind, Baba says that whatever path has to be adopted to remove the body mind, one should adopt it. Only then can the state of ecstasy be attained. This message becomes clear to us from the discussion of Krishna ji. Wow very beautiful Krishna ji. Through this leela, Baba seems to be telling us that this world is an arena and every person is a wrestler. This world is a race so every person is a player. The rules of this world say that whoever wins is Alexander. But from my point of view he is the Alexander of this mortal world. In my view, the number one player in this place is actually the number one player in the reverse race. In my view, his every success, every victory is defeat because he has lost more precious than his life and this world his own soul. And instead, the one who saves his soul even after losing his life and this world, only he is the true Alexander of this world. In the end, on this Leela, my Hitagath says that if you become crazy about this mortal world and sift even the ashes of the dust, then this world itself will turn you into ashes one day. But on the contrary, if you become extinct for this world while you are alive, then the same world will become an ignorant slave and turn into ashes rising from your feet. That is why this mortal world is called Maya. In reality, victory in this world is not victory but defeat and defeat in this world is none but triumph The charming one, the remover of curses, the destroyer of ignorance, the giver of salvation, the supreme welfare giver, the granter of truth awareness consciousnesses, the mother of Sai, Sai incarnate, glory to divine book Sai satcharitra",
    "Description": "✨Adhyay 5 (Ovi 64-74).✨\nHow could Sai Baba lose a wrestling match? What deeper truth was Baba revealing through His humble defeat—and His quiet departure from the village afterward?\nIn this powerful and eye-opening talk, Shri Krishnaji unpacks the symbolic meaning behind Sai Baba’s wrestling loss. Far from being a failure, this Leela is a profound spiritual teaching wrapped in simplicity. \nDiscover how Baba’s graceful surrender carried a message of inner victory, detachment, and divine play. His actions, though outwardly ordinary, hold the key to our own transformation.\n🔸 A must-watch for every devotee seeking to understand Baba’s silent teachings.\n🔸 Let your heart awaken to the deeper message behind the Leelas.\n🔸 Witness how Baba turned defeat into divine guidance.\n🙏🏻Om Sai Ram🙏🏻\n\n---------------------\n0:00 Introduction\n0:34 Wrestling Story\n2:04 Baba's divine wisdom veiled in simple plays\n2:59 Importance of losing in this impermanent world\n6:24 Attainment of renunciation\n8:14 Essence of the Leela\n---------------------\n\n✨अध्याय ५ (ओवी ६४–७४)✨\nसाईं बाबा कुश्ती में कैसे हार सकते हैं? इस विनम्र पराजय और उसके बाद गाँव छोड़ देने के निर्णय के पीछे बाबा कौन-सा गूढ़ सत्य प्रकट कर रहे थे?\nइस अत्यंत प्रेरणादायक और जागृति से भरपूर प्रवचन में, श्री कृष्णाजी साईं बाबा की इस कुश्ती की लीलात्मक हार के प्रतीकात्मक अर्थों पर प्रकाश डालते हैं। यह हार कोई असफलता नहीं, बल्कि एक गहन आध्यात्मिक शिक्षा है जो सादगी के आवरण में छुपी है।\nआइए जानें कैसे बाबा का सहज समर्पण भीतर की विजय, वैराग्य और दिव्य खेल का संदेश लेकर आता है। उनका आचरण चाहे बाहर से सामान्य लगे, परंतु उसमें हमारी आत्मिक रूपांतरण की चाबी छुपी है।\n🔸 हर सच्चे श्रद्धालु के लिए एक ऐसी झलक, जो बाबा की निःशब्द शिक्षाओं का सार प्रकट करती है।\n🔸 बाबा की लीलाओं में छुपे सूक्ष्म भावों को महसूस करे।\n🔸 देखिए कैसे बाबा ने हार को एक उच्चतम आत्मिक संदेश में बदल दिया।\n🙏🏻ॐ साई राम🙏🏻\n\n#sai #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #like #comment #share#explore #fyp #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #values #youtube#zili#shraddha#saburi #newgeneration#peace #saisatcharitra#young #corespirituality #saileelarahasya#viral …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "3,286 views",
    "Likes": "284"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साईबाबा और मकरसंक्रात ( मेघा की लीला )",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f9lzha2Uky4",
    "Transcript": "if we could not fill the intellect with conscience and wisdom we cannot make one intellect listen to the Ramayan story, if one intellect we cannot narrate the Mahabharata poetry to our coming generation then you cannot light up the intellect If every verse of Sai Satcharitra does not touch your heart, it does not seep into your intellect then it is not enlightened intellect it is like that of Shakuni. It will not allow you take human birth in the next birth it will take you down to animal species Makar Sankranti. What is Makar Sankranti? The Sun travels all the twelve Zodiac signs and when it enters Capricorn Zodiac sign then it is called transition into Capricorn and that is why it is called Makar Sankranti. The Sun moves from the South to the north means this day or next day it will enter north. Just as the day has two parts, half is night and the other half is day, there are 24 hours in a day. Similarly, the night of the year is Dakshinayan (Summer Solstice) from July to January is the night of the year and the day of the year is Uttarayan (Summer Solstice) which is from 14th/15th January to 15th June. This is the day of the year. It is day of brightness. It means it is the first day of brightness. This is as per Zodiac sign, planets and Nakshatras. But the real meaning of Sankranti, San+Kranti. Kranti means change, Kranti is a new morning and when will this change come? When there is a transformation in our mind. When the change originates within us. When our life changes then in my eyes this is Sankranti. So many Sankrantis have come as per the calendar. It has its own place. Then original Sankranti if at all there is one then when there comes a positive change in our mind, the day when we change the way we live life, when we start walking on the right path, we start going from darkness into light then know that on that day Sankranti has happened in our life. This is original Sankranti. So, if tomorrow is Sankrant then today is bhogi, a day before Sankrant is known as bhogi. All the indulgent instincts that are there in our mind, in South what we do on bhogi day is first we clean the house entirely , all old and dirty things are removed and burnt in the house courtyard. And is called fire of Bhogi. What is the meaning of this? If we want to initiate something new, start something new and if we want to go in a new direction of change, then the dirt within us has to be burnt in the fire of bhogi. So, till such time the whole dirt is not burnt to ashes we cannot see the real morning the next day., we cannot see the Sankrant (change) This is Sankrant, San+Kranti means change in the right direction, positive change. There is a story, leela in Sai Satcharitra, all of you must have read that leela many times. It is the day of Makar Sankrant, Baba is sitting in Dwarakamai, today I will take up this leela. Megha who believes Baba to be a manifestation of Shivji, Megha comes to Baba and says Baba today is Makar Sankranti and Shivji is very happy with the water of the Ganges, I believe you to be Shivji, so today I wish to bathe you. Baba says that I sit in this dilapidated Masjid, what does a Fakir have to do with Gangajal (water of the Ganges), there is no need to do this. But Megha does not listen. He says no Baba I want to bathe you at any cost. Baba loses in front of the insistence of the devotee. He says okay go and bring Ganges water. So, 8 Kos away towards Umbergao the Godavari River that flows, he goes there, and fills an urn with water. He walks 8 Kos there and returns back walking 8 Kos and it is afternoon time and he again starts requesting Baba to come out and sit and that he wants to bathe him. Baba says since you have got an urn full of water from far then listen to me. In the whole body, head is the main part, head has most importance. On this head the little water that you have got then just sprinkle some on the head, it is as good as a bath. At least listen to this much. What Baba wanted he got that only done. He wanted that some water be sprinkled on the head, , after the entire urn was emptied on to Baba’s body only small part of the head was wet and his entire body was dry. Now the question is what is Baba trying to tell us through this Leela. This is the problem. The story ends here in Sai Satcharitra but we never think what is the secret behind this Leela. What was Baba trying to tell? Yes. This is a miracle. He poured all the water but the body was not wet but only a small part of the head was wet. Baba did this miracle and proved that you cannot go against my wishes. You may try to do as you want but you will not be able to go against my wish. In the end only my wish will prevail. This is proved through this Leela there are no two opinions on it. But the question is what is the secret behind this Leela? In Brahadaranyaka Upanisad there is a Shanti (peace) Mantra Asato ma sadgamaya, tamaso ma jyotirgamaya, mutyorma amrtam gamaya, om shanti santi shantih. In That tamaso ma jyotirgamaya is said from the depth of darkness of mind, Oh God take me towards light. From darkness take me towards light. From darkness take me towards the flame. Similarly, the Gayatri mantra which is the essence of Vedas Om Bhur Bhuvassuvaha Tatsa viturvarenyam, Bhargo devasya Dhimahi, Dhiyo yonaha prachidayat. The simple meaning of this is Oh Lord, you are the ruler of all the three worlds, I pray to you that let my intellect not take me on to the wrong path even for a moment, neither in sleep, wakeful state or in dream. When I sleep, I have no control at that time, even at that time let not even a bad dream enter. Keep my intellect strong, take it towards light, this is the prayer in Gayatri mantra. Sai Satcharitra Adhyay 16 Verse 95 Vanyadhi-sarvyendriyancha laya, kara mani wha krutnischay, alongwith speech all other senses harmonize it in the mind tya manacha kara kshay, and then destroy that mind ghyava tav buddhicha and then merge that mind in the intellect and then take support of the intellect. Sadhana begins with the senses, that I should not see wrong, things, I should not speak false, I should not hear wrong things and I should not touch wrong things, it means all the sense organs that we have, no wrong deeds should happen through that, no wrong action should happen. If you follow this then you have gained a little bit of control on your senses. Now going ahead, the 6 enemies that arise in the mind desires, anger, greed, attachment, ego and jealousy, now work on these 6 defects then when you start working on the mind then senses will on their own merge with the mind. Because the Master of the senses is mind. Now working on the 6 enemies then such a mind has to merge with the intellect. Then he says ghyava thay buddhicha. If your intellect is empowered only then it can work on the senses and also on the mind. But if your intellect is disabled, if the intellect does not have wisdom, if the intellect does not have detachment, if the intellect has not heard of good spiritual books if the intellect does not have the light of the company of the wise ones (Satsang) , then it will not be able to work on the senses and the mind. It is impossible. In the next verse 96 he says Prakash Swaroop je gyanbuddhi, and when will this intellect become like a light, when you fill it up with the light of the company of the wise one (Satsang), when you are in the company of saints and wise ones When you repeatedly hear the divine spiritual Sai Satcharitra which is the soul of Baba, then your mind will be like light. Manasi tethe lava samadhi and then one has to go in profound meditation in that intellect. Till such time there is no light in the intellect profound meditation of the mind is impossible. So first fill the intellect with so much wisdom and detachment that mind goes into profound meditation Prakash Swaroop je gyanbuddhi, manasi tethe lava samadhi manasaha sarvendriya samruddhi, , the prosperity of all the senses along with the mind, eka Swadhin buddhichya. Means this body is the grossest, senses are subtle than this eyes, ears, tongue, mouth, skin, speech all these senses are the Master of this gross body and the Master of the senses is the mind and the Master of the mind is the intellect. If you see like this, then who is the Master of this entire existence? Who is the Master of the whole Body. It is intellect. It is not the mind. It is the intellect. This is what this tells. Now I come to the leela. Baba said that in the entire body the head is the Chief. It means that it represents the intellect. You just sprinkle a little water on it then it will take care of the whole body. Do you understand this? Baba is saying why are you stuck in this outwards bathing, Megha? Let me tell you what real bathing is. Original bathing is that this intellect has to be filled by the Light, let it be filled by my will. Let it be filled with yearning for my heart. Fill it with wisdom and attachment. That is real bath. There is Kabirji’s doha Nahaey dhoye kya hua, you bathe daily. There are some people who take bath twice a day. There are some who scrub their body and take bath. It should be that way. You have to keep the body clean. I am not against it. But Kabirji says Nahaey dhoye kya hua, jo man mael na jaye, you may apply shampoo on the body, you may apply the world’s best soap, you scrub your body and bathe but Kabirji says Nahaey dhoye kya hua, jo man mael na jaye, Machli sada jal mei rahe, dhoye bas na jay. The fish is in water 24 hours but if you remove it out it stinks. If you do all sort of Baba ‘s pooja, do Baba’s aarti, you are praising Baba, doing bhajans, do padyatra, do parikrama but if you do not understand Baba’s heart then that intellect does not have the light. That intellect is not filled with light, so Baba tells Megha when I say just sprinkle some drops, so always the bath has to be taken of that of intellect. If you are able to bathe the intellect by giving the coming of the wise ones (Satsang), by giving light by knowing the will of the Sadguru, reading every Adhyay of Sai Satcharitra, if you can fill the intellect with light then it is bathing the actual existence. This is original bath. Then what bath you take, you just scrub your body hard. It is not the bath of the existence. You are keeping it clean at the gross level. You have no capability of keeping it clean at the subtle level. This is such a small Leela. Sprinkle little water on my head Megha. Baba wanted to tell that fill your intellect with wisdom, with my will, you fill it with yearning of my heart. Know what I expect from you, in this way you will be able to fill your intellect with my light and oh Megha that will be your real bath and the daily bath that you take that is not the actual bath. It is a small Leela but in that Leela we only see miracle. But through this Leela baba wanted to tell something really deep. Frankly speaking that this existence is been run by the intellect and if that intellect is false intellect, scheming intellect, it is foolishness and it will not stop without destroying this body. This human body is said to be most important amongst 84 lakhs species, that body you will make it worthless. It is not known whether next body will be that of human because you used it foolishly, you did not use it well. You have a cunning intellect. See, even Shakuni was intelligent but it was always filled with incorrect reasoning, no human was more cunning than Shakuni but it was in wrong direction. Same intelligence Krishna also has, even Krishna was intelligent but that intellect was as per Dharma, it was with justice, it was with principles. That is why Krishna is Krishna and Shakuni is Shakuni. Even today Krishna is worshiped but if we take even the name of Shakuni a kind of negativity enters within us and that is Shakuni. The reason is the damaging intellect, it is filled with wickedness, it is not honest intellect. It is not as per righteousness (dharma) If someone is saying something then how should I take it, if my intellect converts to wisdom then wherever piousness is seen, wherever honesty is seen there your ego will bow down. Then whosoever may be in front of you, you will bow down to such a person. So, your intellect is inspired by good sense. But if you do not have that capability then you will not be able to bow down to the truthfulness. And you never bow down to a person, remember this, you bow down to the piousness of that individual. You can never bow down to an individual, what is the importance of that body? but importance is of the intellect. With one small Leela Baba is saying just sprinkle some water on my head and the bath is done. This Leela is so very important, those who are listening to me please understand this carefully if we cannot fill one intellect with wisdom, if one intellect we cannot fill with light, we cannot make one intellect listen to the Ramayan story, if one intellect we cannot narrate the Mahabharata poetry to our coming generation then you cannot light up the intellect. If every verse of Sai Satcharitra does not touch your heart, it does not seep into your intellect then it is not enlightened intellect it is like that of Shakuni. It will not allow you take human birth in the next birth it will take you down to animal species which is filled with incorrect reasoning. From wherever you get light, from wherever you get goodness, from wherever you get purity, spread your bag and take it let not your ego come in between. It is a very small Leela of Megha, it is from Adhyay 28, it is a small Leela of Megha and it happened on Makar Sankrant. Baba is saying that if in this life you keep this one intellect properly then your entire existence will be taken care of. What you have to eat, what you should drink, when you should eat, how much to eat, what you should speak, where you should keep quiet, where you should open your mouth. I remember an incident from Mahabharat. Yudhistar’s Rajsuv yagna is completed and all the Kauravs and Pandavas meet at a place for participating in the yagna. But seeing that Yagna Duryodhana and Dushyasana are jealous, we gave them khandav prastha and they made Indraprashta out of it and on top of it he is doing Rajsuv yagna but out of jealousy, envy, all of them are assembled there but Duryodhana is not there inspite of being there but something is going on in his mind. Krishna is also there, Maharshi Vyas comes there and there is one uniqueness of Vyas, if you see the serial and even if you read the Mahabharata, he spoke very little but whatever he spoke it was very deep. Vyas says that seeing this I feel very happy that everyone has come together, Kauravas and the Pandavas, one never knows when we will see this auspicious day again. The meaning of this is, sage Vyas was farsighted and he knew that this was their last meeting. They will never come close after today. So Sage Vyasa speaks a word, cautioning Duryodhana O Duryodhana, one should never forget his place. The light of the lamp is of the lamp and the light of the sun is of the sun. Now this Vyasa Maharishi is telling to Duryodhana. He speaks this much and leaves from there, Dhritarashtra says that what has Vyas ji said that the light of the lamp is of the lamp, the light of the sun is of the sun, then Duryodhana interrupts, \"What is in this, Father? A lamp is a lamp and the sun is sun. Then Krishna says: Duryodhana, i did not understand what Vyasa Maharshi said. Then you will be able to explain, He repeats the same thing that a lamp is a lamp and the sun is sun. This is fallacious reasoning. There Vyasa Maharishi had to say, \" O Duryodhana, to become a king one should posses qualities of righteousness, being devoted to it, morality all those are in Yudhistir as a radiating sun and in you it is present as gleaming as that of a lamp But Yudhishthira is the shining sun, so his place is his, your place is yours. If you accept this truth, then one day you too will be able to become the sun, otherwise this lamp will also be extinguished. This slight flicker of lamp will also be extinguished. and that's how it happens. In the end, all the kavravs are killed, and lamp is extinguished. So, if in your intellect there is no light of faith, no light of conscience, no light of religion where to bow down. If someone who gives better knowledge than me stands in front, then there I should not delay even for a moment, I must bow down at the feet of that person and if this faith is not present then it will not take time to extinguish this lamp. So, that is the status of the intellect. There will be fewer mistakes in life. And if there are fewer mistakes, then there will be less sorrow, but if one cannot fill this intellect with light, then whenever you will be at the divergence You will choose the wrong path and you will continue to stumble after stumble, you will continue to suffer in sorrow. therefore Always keep the intellect strong. Keep it full of light that whenever you stand at the divergence you can easily think and get out by taking aid of what is right and can avoid misery moment by moment And as soon as this intellect turned into foolishness, pride and eccentricity came into it. And if one walks towards foolishness, nothing will be gained except sorrow. Through this small leela Baba said that megha you have been bathing body from births now i am telling another bath i.e to bathe your intellect be vigilant about it Every moment Fill the intellect with the light of the scriptures, with an epic like Ramayana and Mahabharata. fill it with every word every verse of Sai satcharitra then that light will never let you accept wrong path and by which you will be saved from forthcoming difficulties or else they will never your pursuit because your intellect has become vicious So, a complete effort has been made to explain this through leela now look there is another couplet of Kabir 'shabd vichari jo chale, gurumukh hoi nihaal' So, the words that emerge from the Sadguru's speech. Every verse that Sai Satcharitra tells is Baba's word so he is saying, ' shabd vichari jo chale gurumukh hoi nihaal ' and the one who listens to Guru not mind see Manmukhi means doing devotion according to my will. And Gurmukhi means devotion according the will of the Guru, the will of Sai, the difference of the land and sky. The mind-oriented devotion is very easy. There is no struggle and then added to we resort to what Baba has said ' jaya mani jaisa bhav taya taisa anubhava '. This is our Bramhastra (excuse) However, that mind-oriented devotion is not devotion of the intellect filled with wisdom, it is devotion of the mind. If you know Baba's will and do such devotion, then your intellect has been empowered and your intellect gives birth to a vast form. The devotion that takes place on the basis of the intellect is the devotion to the entirety and the devotion that is taking place on the strength of the mind individualized devotion I tell these two things over and over again. Please understand it very well . so ' shabad vichari jo chale gurumukh hoi nihaal ' Gurumukh means to know Guru's wish and walk accordingly and maanmukhi means to revere according to my will Who are you to tell me, do this, don't do this, such people ask me, yes brother, forgive me, I did not come to you. You came if you do not like it, then you keep going. They straight forwardly ask Who are you? Baba Himself says that 'jaya mani jaisa bhav taya taisa anubhav', there are a million words where His will opens, but you can't see that. Don't want to. You are Shakuni You are Shakuni. You don't even want to know Baba's will, If you consider only one vow' 'jaya mani jaisa bhav taya taisa anubhav' 'jaki rahi bhavana jaisi prabhu murat dekhi tin taisi' Only this much have been said by Goswami Tulsidas. He has spoken millions of couplets over the intellect. There are thousands that propound God's will. No, but you won't take that. This has a big convenience for you. no struggle for mind Do devotion at will. Easy , There is no conflict . Then people accept it very easily. And don't even want to hear the truth. On the contrary, want to suppress the truth. The problem is this. 'shabd vichari jo chale gurumuk hoe nihaal, kaam krodh vyape nahi kabhu na grase kaal' Those who follow the Guru's will for them He does not let the great enemies like lust and anger to enter in their hearts. And death can never touch that person because he realizes the soul. I am not the body, I am the soul and the soul never dies. While he is alive, he gets this experience by being Gurmukhi not by being maanmukhi. So these are some of the things that Baba want to put in front of the people very well through this Leela. I hope this leela has opened up well See, What the complete character of Ram ji is? The one who lived life on the basis of intellect was Ram. The intellect was filled with righteousness, the intellect was filled with ethics and behaved accordingly . That is why he was called Lord Ram, I take an instance from the life of Lord Rama. His intellect is so clear, it is understandable. Lord Rama, after marrying Sita in Mithila, has reached Ayodhya. It's their first night together. Rama is about to enter Sita's chamber, it's night time. Kaikai calls him and says, 'Today is your first night, a very auspicious night.' She has a precious ring and tells Rama to make Sita wear it, saying it's a gift from him. Rama takes it in his hand, smiles, and says, 'Alright, I'll give it.' But as he enters in, he doesn't give the ring to Sita, he keeps it in his pocket. Then he says, 'When I was entering this chamber with Sita, my mother gave me a gem, a ring, as the first offering. On this auspicious moment of our wedding night, I'm not giving you a gift today. In our tradition, my father, my grandfather, and his father, they had multiple marriages, multiple queens. But I promise you, in the temple of my heart, there will never be anyone else besides you. This is Rama. This is wisdom. This is called true intelligence. So, our tradition continues. My father had three marriages and this tradition has been going on for a long time . I'm breaking it today, that's wrong. So I promise you, I promise you that from now on no one will have a place in my heart except you. So, this is the intellect Another example from Ram's life itself . What is good sense? One day prior, the announcement has been made that Rama will be crowned as the king in the morning. King Dasharatha announces, and the entire city gets decorated, for Rama is going to become a righteous king. The entire city is adorned with lights. But Manthara's mind gets corrupted. She goes and instigates Kaikai corrupting her mind as well. She goes to Dasharatha and asks for two wishes, the first wish. Bharat's the coronation, and second, Rama's 14 years of exile. And when Rama gets to know about this, that mother has asked father for these two wishes knowing about it, he shuns the parasol and other kingly servings to him, and he go to Mother Kaushalya's chamber. And Mother Kaushalya has been awake all night, thinking that tomorrow her son will be crowned as the king. So, she chants the name of Lord Vishnu 100,000 times with pouring water over the idol she says, 'I've blessed this water by chanting Vishnu's name all night because my son is going to be crowned as the king tomorrow. So, drink it.' Rama says,\" No mother I am not sitting on the throne.' So, the mother says, 'Why? as Mother Kaikeyi asked father two wishes so according to that i will have to leave for 14 years of exile and my younger brother will be coronated instead So, Mother Kaushalya gets dizzy and falls, and after a while, when she composes herself, she says, 'you said it as if it's something easy that I'm going to be exiled for 14 years. As if it's nothing' So, at that moment, Rama says to Mother Kaushalya, 'No, Mother, this is destined. This is written in my destiny.' I am not suspecting it as anyone's conspiracy. I do not consider mother Kaikeyi guilty in any way. First of all, let me make it clear that this is my destiny. And mother, you people are just seeing that I have been exiled for 14 years, but you are not seeing its other side. First of all, my father's promise to Kaikeyi, that has been fulfilled today, so that means I have fulfilled my father's promise, and second, it's Kaikeyi's wish that I go into exile for 14 years, so I have fulfilled my mother's wish. This is my second good deed. The first one, I could fulfill my father's promise. This is my first good deed. Moreover, keeping mother Kaikeyi's sentiments in mind, I am going into exile. This is my second virtue. And third, My brother like Bharata, is getting the coronation. I would happily grant that to him because he is of higher stature, of high dignity. If my brother is being crowned, then this is my third virtue. . And after going into exile, I will gain enlightenment from the sages and ascetics in those forests. This is my fourth virtue. Mother says, 'You've been blessed from all sides.' So, this is intelligence. But this intelligence must always be kept in the company of good people. We must always read stories like the Ramayana, always attach ourselves to the Sai Satcharitra from the heart. Each word should resonate within the heart, then this intelligence will be filled with ethics, righteousness, discernment, and detachment. Otherwise, it won't be clear when this intelligence might convert into foolishness. And it's not easy as it's the natural inclination is just baseless arguments. Baba always use to say that those sticky devotees whom he used to describe as Teli if out of some reason there oil is wrung out then they would become Tamboli. They start hating Baba. Stating He insulted them in front of so many people. What if the reprimand received is taken as a blessing Taken in the right direction, then there's no problem. Contrary you will head towards light and will set an example for four people But if deceit, arrogance, and cunningness arise, then you will fall. You will fall in your own eyes and in the eyes of others. It's destruction in every way. That's called foolishness. Good intelligence and foolishness. And as Baba used to say, the most important thing in this whole body is the head, meaning intelligence. Intelligence should always be filled with light. Because if this gets controlled, then the entire existence gets controlled. But if you can't control one thing, if you can't fill it with light, then you're causing harm to the entire existence. therefore kabirji says,'kabira ek n janiya toh bahu janiya kya hoi, ek sab hot hai sab se ek nahi' everything is with this, but without this is nothing as further he says, 'sab aye iss ek me daal paat faal fhul all the senses, physical organs, senses, mind and vices of the mind, all these have entered your intellects. 'kabira ab kya rah gaya, jab gah pakdi mool' if the root has been touched, then remember that if you want to know about the whole universe, then this is the root, the intellect That's why Baba said, 'Just sprinkle a little water here and consider it as light. Bathe it so that this individual entity whish is also universe, if you can handle it, then you will have a right over the whole too, but If there is any link between the individual entity and cosmic entity then it is the intellect, the one who lives life according to the intellect filled with sadguru's will that one conquers individual and universal entity If one does mind willed devotion and if there is 100% refuge, then only individual entity can be conquered not universal. the whole play is of intellect O enchantress, overcomes bane and calamities, the destroyer of ignorance, the giver of liberation, the ultimate benefactor, the embodiment of truth and consciousness, the bestower of endless joy, the mother of Sai, Sai incarnate, victory to the divine scripture Shri Sai Satcharitra.",
    "Description": "ॐ साई राम 🙏🏻\n📖 श्री साई सच्चरित्र। अध्याय 28 । मकरसंक्रांति के अवसर पर मेघा द्वारा बाबा को स्नान\n\nइस लीला मे मेघा के मन में आता है की मकरसंक्रांति के अवसर पर शिव जी को गंगा जल स्नान से प्रसन होते है और बाबा ही शंकर है उन्हे स्नान करवाना चाहिए।\nमेघा का अनन्य प्रेम देख कर बाबा आज्ञा तो देते है किंतु साथ ही कहते की, \"मेघा तुम केवल मेरे सर पर ही थोड़ा सा जल छिड़क दो, ऐसा करने से स्नान पूर्ण हो जाएगा\"। किंतु मेघा अपने आनंद में पूरे शरीर पर जल डालते है। जब देखते है तो बाबा का केवल सिर ही गिला है और पूरा शरीर सुखा होता है। \n\n🤔 इस लीला में बाबा का चमत्कार तो स्पष्ट दिख रहा है किंतु जो बाबा ने शब्द कहे क्या उसका भी कोई अर्थ है? बाबा के शब्द कभी थोते पोछे नहीं होते ऐसा बाबा खुद कहते है। तो फिर बाबा के उन शब्दों की गहराई क्या हो सकती है?\n\nइस विडियो में श्री कृष्णा जी द्वारा हम लीला में छुपी गहराई को, लीला के रहस्य को समझ पाएंगे।\n\n🌼यह विडियो उन सभी आध्यात्मिक साधको के लिए है जो आत्मिक उन्नति की सच्ची राह को समझना चाहते हैं।\n\n🙏🏻विडियो को देखे, अनुभव करें और आत्ममंथन करें।\n\nMegha Bathes Baba on the Occasion of Makar Sankranti\n\n📖 Shri Sai Satcharitra । Chapter 28 । Megha Bathes Baba on the Occasion of Makar Sankranti\n\nIn this divine episode, it occurs to Megha that Lord Shiva is pleased when bathed with Ganga water on the occasion of Makar Sankranti, and since Baba is himself Shankar (Shiva), he should also be given a holy bath.\n\nSeeing Megha’s deep and unwavering devotion, Baba gives his consent, but he also says:\n“Megha, just sprinkle a little water on my head only. That will be enough for the bath.”\n\nBut, lost in joy and devotion, Megha pours water over Baba’s entire body. However, to his amazement, he finds that only Baba's head is wet while the rest of his body remains completely dry.\n\n🤔 In this leela, Baba's miracle is clearly evident. But what about the words he spoke? Do they hold a deeper meaning too?\nBaba himself says that his words are never empty or meaningless.\nSo then, what could be the depth and significance behind those words?\n\nIn this video, Shri Krishna Ji helps us understand the deeper truth and hidden spiritual meaning behind this divine episode.\n\n🌼 This video is meant for all sincere spiritual seekers who wish to understand the true path of inner spiritual progress.\n\n🙏🏻 Watch the video, experience it, and reflect within.\n\n\n#श्रीसाईंसच्चरित्र #सत्पुरुष #महापुरुष #आध्यात्मिकयात्रा #विनायकहरिश्चंद्रठाकुर #साईंबाबा #श्रीकृष्ण #संतविचार #आत्मिकउन्नति #धर्मकीबात #spiritualindia #SaiSatcharitra #Satpurush #Mahapurush #SpiritualJourney #VinayakThakur #SaiBaba #ShriKrishna #SpiritualWisdom #PathToEnlightenment #DivineKnowledge #indianspirituality \n\n\nREFERENCE : \nSHREE SAI SATCHARITRA ADHYAY 28 …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "6,365 views",
    "Likes": "399"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई की जानकारी नही साई का ज्ञान",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ygKgOuWOytA",
    "Transcript": "We can get millions giving information in the name of Baba. It is very weird absurd world Here speakers are in numbers whereas listeners are rarity Real knowledge often remains suppressed. Look, information is not a wrong thing, it works a lot in the beginning. Because that information also increases our devotion. Our faith and devotion increases. But, if you want permanant knowledge then you will need to watch it again and again and read as well Millions of salutations at the feet of all Sai devotees. See, there's one thing that always comes to mind that i should clarify it. you will get millions of people giving information about Baba Historians, scholars, you'll find countless in the market. Thousands, even millions of people we can get. In fact, this is the age of Kali; there are more speakers than listeners. It's a very strange world here. Here, there are more talkers and fewer listeners. so millions of people are there who provide information about Sai. But information is a different thing. Giving information about Baba is a different thing and about Baba. Expositing Baba's heart or wish is a different thing. It is a different thing to convey Baba's heart into the hearts of common people. Giving information mean you've reached Baba's physical form. However many people provide information about Baba, there are millions of people. Some have written books, some have told stories, and some have TV channels, I mean, people are creating YouTube channels and promoting Baba in their own way. Many such people are there. But we never manage to differentiate between information and exact knowledge. We could never understand this difference. There is a world of difference between the two. There are innumerable books about Baba for giving information, you can read them from one place. You can put it in your mind and then present it back to the world. It is a very easy task, your language should be good, you will be able to retain it. But, giving information about Baba is a different thing, How is Baba's wish? What is it's meaning? What is the essence of his thoughts, the depth of his mind, to bring that into your heart is something else altogether. For providing information, you have only one path: to read all the available books on Baba's thoroughly And you have to present that learned and memorized information in front of the public. So, this becomes informative knowledge. But the troubling thing is Niether the speaker knows that it's information, nor the listener realizes that it's information. Real knowledge often remains suppressed. Like something very precious gets buried under some debris. Then first that garbage has to be picked up and then that precious thing comes into our hands. In the same way, as Baba has been covered under the veil of information So all the garbage will have to be picked up and thrown away first. What happens right? Look, information is not a wrong thing, it works a lot in the beginning. Because that information also increases our devotion. Our faith and devotion increases. But, It lasts for a very short time and is momentary. It cannot have long term effect over your heart. So if you want permanent knowledge then the only way is Satsang. The meaning of Satsang is company with Truth. Not with Baba's body. Nor with information about Baba. Satsang is the association with the true form of Baba's soul. Sai Satcharitra teaches us how to correspond with Baba's heart and with Baba's soul. So millions and millions of books on one side and Sai Satcharitra at one. There are millions of books which can take you to Baba's physical manifestation through it But if you want to enter Baba's heart. Baba's will has to be known. If you want to mold your life accordingly then you have no other option apart from Sai satcharitra. So please do you care about this difference? the people who give informative knowledge. You will like it once to hear. You will not even want to look again but the Satsang, the videos on Sai Leela Rahasya, you cannot understand their in depth meaning by going through it once. Because I have spoken on the basis of the experience that Master has given me and we have to reach that experience. there is great difference as on listening reading and watching informative knowledge for 1st time it gets imbibe onto the mind but you cannot understand Baba's wants and wishes by listening and watching videos for one time So you have to watch again and again. You'll have to watch repeatedly, understand repeatedly, and only then will you be able to reach Baba's heart. So please don't make a mistake with my video. And I don't care how many subscribers I have. But those who sincerely want to know Baba's heart, will watch every video of mine for several times Only then will it descend, only then will you be able to reach there. So I request you all not to think that you have understood Baba by watching video once Giving information is a very easy thing. But to go through experience is like to go through Baba's dhuni It is not easy. Like Dnyaneshwar Maharaj experienced it earlier later created Dnyaneshwari or Tukaram Maharaj, he first experienced and later composed the Gatha(compilation) or Samarth Ramdas Swami who first experienced and later created the Dasbodh. So the leelas don't unfold like this one has to go through that experience Only then would each leela unfold. So please do me a favor. Do not put this satsang in the queue of those who give information. Their way is different but I will say again that they are also needed, for new devotees. Those who are in the initial stage, there is a need for those who provide information. That's why perhaps there is a conversation between Shiva and Parvati in Skanda Purana Parvati asks Shivji, \"Tell me about the aspect of Guru\", then Shivji tells her what the importance of Guru is. So while telling that he tells about seven types of Guru. Vachak guru, bodhak guru, param guru, sadguru given by different names, then why is it so? Meaning, it is the job of the vachak guru to read it from here, memorize it from here and deliver it here. And if the Guru has the power to narrate the depth of the great statement like 'Tattva masi', then he is called a Karnatmak Guru The sixth type of Guru and the seventh is Sadguru like Baba It is our fortune that we have got him. we will discuss the analysis of the seven Gurus some other time. But what is the meaning of this, this world begins its journey begins from the Vachak Guru who is at number one position and ends there only. And that's the problem we never reach beyond it to Karnathya Guru or Sadguru So, since the topic erupted, I talked a little about it. So both are very different, information is a different thing and satsang said through experience is a different thing, so please do not put both of them in one row. Whenever i say such, I might seem a little arrogant. You may feel i am conceited, but try to understand the yearning behind it because the market of fakes is so stirring The yearning of the real one which has been suppressed. Nothing else. So these two are different things. Please differentiate it well. If information givers are like shining stars giving information there will be millions. But there is only one sun in this world who shares experience and knowledge. So there is so much difference, so much difference. So the sooner we accept this truth. That much is good for all of us. And I know this much, no matter where one is stuck. He may be trapped in the affairs of Vachak Guru, but if Baba sees in him that he can rise higher, then Baba is going to lift up every such person and make him sit in this court. This is my complete belief. So there is no dilemma in this. O enchantress, the remover of curses, the destroyer of ignorance, the giver of salvation, supreme benefactor, truth awareness and bliss giver mother of Sai, Sai incarnate, diadem of all scriptures, glory to shree Sai satcharitra divine book",
    "Description": "कृष्णाजी द्वारा प्रस्तूत यह वीडियो साईबाबा के वास्तविक स्वरूप को समझने की एक गहन आध्यात्मिक यात्रा है। साई केवल जानकारी का विषय नहीं हैं; उन्हें समझने के लिए अनुभवजन्य ज्ञान की आवश्यकता है। यह ज्ञान प्राप्त करने का सर्वोत्तम साधन है – साई सच्चरित्र।\n\nइस वीडियो में सत्संग के गहरे अर्थ को उजागर किया गया है, स्कंद पुराण में शिव-पार्वती के संवाद के माध्यम से गुरु तत्व की महिमा बताई गई है और जानकारीपूर्ण ज्ञान व अनुभवजन्य ज्ञान के अंतर को सरलता से समझाया गया है। यह यात्रा साधक को साई के हृदय तक पहुँचने और उनके दिव्य संदेश को आत्मसात करने का मार्ग दिखाती है। \n\n🪷🪷🪷\n5:48 सत्संग मतलब क्या ?\n6:27 साईका हृदय जानना है तो केवल साईसत्चरित्र क्यो ?\n10:07 स्कंद पुराण शिव पार्वती गुरुतत्व संवाद\n12:38 Informative ज्ञान और अनुभवजन्य ज्ञान का फरक\n🪷🪷🪷 \n\nThis video explores the deeper essence of Sai Baba – beyond mere information, into true spiritual wisdom. To truly understand Sai Baba, one must go beyond facts and embrace practical, experiential knowledge. The sacred text Sai Satcharita serves as the guiding light on this journey, revealing Baba’s heart and divine message. \n\nThrough insights on the meaning of Satsang, the teachings of the Skanda Purana (Shiva-Parvati dialogue on Guru Tattva), and the difference between informative and experiential knowledge, this video takes you closer to Sai Baba’s eternal truth.\n\n\n#saisatcharitra #saibaba #spiritualwisdom #gurutatva #satsang #divineknowledge #saibhakti #spiritualawakening #gurutatva #saibaba #satsang #spiritualknowledge #devotionalpath …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "3,332 views",
    "Likes": "282"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई का निष्काम कर्म योग",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cNFwPvZ5spw",
    "Transcript": "That's why I was saying, where motivation ends, spirituality begins from there. Sai's Nishkam Karmayoga and after saying Baba's Nishkam Karmayoga, in reality the whole body should become an ear as to listen what could be Baba's Nishkam Karmayoga? What can Baba tell about selfless Karmayoga? Because we have heard Lord Krishna saying that \"Karmanye vadhikaraste Ma Phaleshu Kadachana, Ma Karmaphalaheturbhurma Te Sangostvakarmani\" in Bhagwad Gita But if the same shloka is practically demonstrated by Baba, then how is it demonstrated? See what is today's problem, let me tell you. Those of you who are active on social media, those who follow social media a lot. One thing you might have noticed is that the popularity of motivational speakers is so high that there is no limit. Not just one but 1000 names will come out, nowadays story tellers are becoming motivational speakers, why? Because people are more likely to engage with motivational speaking. Meaning, the Bhagwat stories too have been left behind and these motivational speakers are very popular in today's era. So today is the era of motivation, so please motivate us in such a way that any of our work can be completed, any of our work can be done, any of our spoiled work can be solved by it, then give us such motivation. So today's youth, who is today's generation, gets involved, but when it comes to selfless karma yoga Then the man feels like this: Oh my God, is this possible? And look every motivational speaker, whether he gives a 2-hour speech or a 3-hour speech, what is its essence, that you should put 100% of your energy in one direction and your intentions should be clear and your direction should be right and You should put in 100% effort. And one must have some patience. Sooner or later your hands will bear fruits/results Here I am giving the gist of that 3-hour speech and then he will explain it to you in many different ways. Listen carefully, I repeat. What is the soul of the complete motivational speech? That if you are putting 100% efforts in the right direction The direction should be right, not wrong. If you are putting 100% effort in the right direction. And if you keep a little Saburi, then one day or the other you will get fruits. This is where motivational speakers fail. Motivational speaker ends here and where all the motivation of the world ends, Lord Krishna or Sai Baba is born from there, because Krishna says,\"Karmanye vadhikaraste Ma Phaleshu Kadachana, Ma Karmaphalaheturbhurma Te Sangostvakarmani\" As the motivational speaker says, first move in the right direction and give 100% effort. Krishna is also saying this. Hard work should be 100%. There should be no less enthusiasm in hard work. There should be complete focus. There should be complete clarity. and one must also have patience. This has been said by Lord Krishna but he adds one thing. Do all this without wishing for any result and the motivational speaker's conclusion is that you will get the result, only your direction must be right, your efforts should be 100% and Lord Krishna is saying something dangerous. Lord Krishna is also putting all these conditions that the motivational speakers are putting that your effort should be 100%. Your focus must be right. Your dedication should be 100% and it should be in the right direction. Despite all this, perhaps I may not give you fruit/result? There are three possibilities for to give up the desire for results That you have put in 100%, you have put in all your heart and in return I may give you 1% fruit or you have worked 50% and my heart melts towards you for that moment and I give you 100%. My will. Or despite your 100% hard work, i won't give you any result for it. despite your 100% effort, I may not give you the result and going further and indirectly he is saying that if you have put 100% effort for the welfare of the other person with full honesty and goodwill, Despite that, I may give you the opposite result Listening carefully this shloka will blow away motivational speakers. This is one shloka has an intense impact of all motivational speakers of the world What is He saying that you will work hard 100% with full focus? You will do it with full dedication, you will do it with full honesty and you will do it in the right direction, regardless I will give you results or i won't, if you give 100% effort, perhaps I may make you this successful, and if you put in only this much effort, maybe I give you this much result, it's up to me. You don't have a right over the result. And if you work with 100% faith, complete dedication, and for the welfare of others, even then if I choose to test you, perhaps I will give you a negative result, the opposite result. Will your faith in me remain unchanged then? Now tell me, where do motivational speakers stand here? Can Motivational speakers stand tall at these words? but our problem is that we like their language you know why? because it's a lie. \"You will get it 100%\" and they speak so loudly that for a short while the person becomes so charged, so excited that one doesn't know what the person will do after getting up from there. So much charged Whatever be the person, he thinks that he will change the whole world after listening to the motivational speech. Hoe hollow is this. The results are not in your hands but Lord Krishna says that as fruit is not in your hand, you should not become indifferent towards your actions. Do the work with same dedication. And despite that, don't wish for any fruit. Whether I give you the fruit or not is up to me. for so much of your hard work, I may give you only this much fruit, it's my wish. I may give you so much fruit for so little of your hard work, it's my choice and maybe I may not give you fruit at all. Despite your 100% efforts, I may not give you fruit at all. And even beyond that, despite you doing some work with so much goodwill, I can spoil some of your work, or give adverse results, will your loyalty and devotion towards me still remain? This is what exactly called Shraddha. This is called Shraddha. I speak very bitter words, I am famous for this. That's why not many people are able to connect with me. But those who join are priceless gems. Let me tell you this also. And I have one faith that Baba will connect every person with me whoever lives in any corner of the world, in any forest, just has to have faith in him and no matter where he lives in the world, that person will connect with me, but it is guaranteed that good people will join. And I don't want rush. I want inquisitive If I had to gather a crowd, my language would be different. I would not have said such bitter things. No, but I told you today about motivational speakers. Who can be a better motivational speaker than Lord Krishna in Bhagwad Geeta? The world's greatest motivational speaker, what hasn't he given to the world in 18 chapters? And I say one thing, to whom has Lord Krishna given all the motivation? It has been given to Arjun and not to Duryodhana. But do you know what the problem is? All Duryodhanas are sitting to listen to motivational speeches. Not one word is going to land. Arjun needs a motivational speech. Not Duryodhana and our heart should understand this clearly. Duryodhana resides within me, there is no need of motivation right now. I want to be molded by the Baba. I am yet to get burned up in Dhuni. After the penance, when there will be some purification, then those motivational things will enter my heart and I will be worthy of it. There is still a lot left to be destroyed. There is still lot of Tamo Guna left to be burned. Now see the difference, Lord Krishna is standing in the battlefield, Kavrav is standing on one side, Pandavas are standing on the other side. The question never came to your mind that why did Lord Krishna recite Geeta only to Arjun? Because you know what Arjun says. The Kauravas did nothing to Pandavas to Arjun except injustice did not give anything except troubles, made them exile, Draupadi's disrobing and conspired an incident like Lakshgriha to happen to them. An attempt was made to burn them to ashes. Gave them 12 years of exile and thirteenth year of incognito living. Despite facing so much. And Arjun is such a warrior who has so much ability that even if he stands alone, he can defeat the entire Kaurava army. Look, who has so much power that the rain of arrows can give a befitting reply to the Kauravas. But what is that person saying, enduring so much insult, so much humiliation, so much suffering? Arjuna is saying to Krishna that Krishna, I am aware of the suffering inflicted upon us by the Kauravas. Every moment they have cheated us and given us nothing but pain and suffering, but still my heart is filled with compassion in this moment. Gandiva is not being lifted by my hand. Why should I kill them? I have no regrets about the bitterness that these people instilled in me throughout my life. On the contrary, my heart is filled with compassion that even though they have made a mistake, but then should I kill them? Meaning, despite suffering so much pain, so much suffering, so much sorrow, this feeling of compassion and forgiveness is rising in Arjun. And Krishna thinks who can be a greater person than this? Who needs that motivational speech. Today, as much as I would like to convey deep things to his heart, I will be able to convey them because his heart is ready, it has become capable of accepting the depth. Arjun is ready for motivation. What would have been the result if Krishna had spent these 18 chapters and 700 verses on Duryodhana? Could he stand there for a moment. So just as to understand Krishna we have to become Arjun, similarly to understand Sai Baba we have to become the greatest devotee, only then we will be able to touch the depth of Baba's heart. There is a leela from the thirty-second chapter. Baba says that when I stepped on the threshold of youth and the responsibility of the family fell on my head I had to leave the house to earn. While roaming around, I reached the door of an owner, there I got the work of Zari(embroidery) and there were already four very intelligent children before me, they were already deployed for the work. And everyone was skilled work in their respective works. So he said, one did work of ₹ 50, the other's work was done of ₹ 100 and the third's work was done of rs 150. But I used to do double the work of rs 300. Listen carefully to Sai's selfless karma yoga. The verse which Lord Krishna has explained in Karmanya vadhi..., Baba has explained it to the people here in a practical manner. Please understand well this Leela one worked for ₹ 50 and got ₹ 50, the other one worked for ₹ 100 and earned ₹ 100. The third one did the work of ₹150 and got ₹150, but Baba says that I did the work double of their's so I got ₹300. But look further Baba says, My master saw my hardwork. He was able to do work of rs 300 where others would do the work of rs 50 in 8 hours His hands move so fast. The desire to work in him runs deep, As a reward for my efforts, I received ₹300. However, upon realizing the exceptional skill of me, My master also gifted me a zari turban and a shawl, warmly welcoming me and Baba also states that, \"I took the rewards off as it was and kept it\" I haven't even touched it. The whole game is in this. It's the complete mystery of Leela, it's the soul of Leela. It's about the fact that the Lord has bestowed so many things upon me. I mean, what Baba is telling us that if you have talent within you. If you have the skill within you and the zeal to work hard, then you can earn millions then earn it This is what He's telling us in the 32nd chapter,ys, If you have the ability to earn millions, if you have that quality, that skill, that art, then earn millions. Then what does the Master do? Seeing our hard work, he gives us that much lavish life. The meaning of the embellishment over head is that much success That you've touched millions of rupees, fame, cars, bungalows, you can encash it now because it's the money you've earned through your hard work, the talent within you, like, for example, today there are actors, today there are big industrialists, Tata, Birla, Ambani, so whatever they've earned today is the result of their hard work, not charity. If a actor charge 500 or 1000 crore, then they've earned that much name, that much fame through their hard work. So, Baba says, there's nothing wrong in earning like that. Earn as much as you can, but when it comes to using it, don't use it on yourself, don't spend it in luxury. But what do these people? They elevate their lifestyle to such an extent. After earning billions, their lifestyle changes, their cars, their mansions, their way of living, their lifestyle. Baba says that they are trapped in these things, after earning so much money if they are spending it on their own luxuries, comforts, and not spending money for religion, then their life is worthless. So here Baba is saying that if you have the ability to earn billions of rupees, then go ahead, earn that money, but as Kabir Ji says,”kar gujraan phakiri main”- 'live modestly.' But when it comes to personal use,take off the shawl or the cloak that the owner has given you; don't wander around wearing it yourself.\" Put it into the service of the world, put it into the service of society, and sustain yourself with minimal money and as much comfort you can forsake, renounce it. This is Sai’s ‘Nishkama Karmayog’, mentioned in the Leela of Chapter 32, and Baba says that, If you can live your life according to what I am saying, first of all, one needs to have the skill to earn that much money. It's not within everyone's capability earning billions and billions of rupees is not within everyone's capability. But after earning, if he can manage to live within 5000 rupees per month and dedicates the remaining amount entirely to charity, to good deeds, then Baba says that this is ‘Nishkama Karmayog’. Which motivational speech in this world can outstay, which motivational speaker can outstay, tell me. And the other thing, if you live your life in such a way that when you earn, you earn in crores, but when it comes to spending, you start managing with just 5000 rupees, such a simple life. Then Lord Krishna says, when you become a ‘Nishkam Karmayogi’ like this, you not only illuminate this world of mine, but when you illuminate this world without any selfishness, then I make your inner self shine, I make you the leader of the universe (Bramhaandanayak) So, this world is his courtyard, his home, so he says, if you become a ‘Nishkam Karmayogi’, you will become worthy of illuminating this world of mine, because you are devoid of selfishness. You have no selfishness in you, that's why you will make this world fragrant, shine, and if you illuminate this world, then I will illuminate your inner self. And I will make sure that people remember you in this world as long as they live, and I will also make you ride in the afterlife because you have governed this world of mine. In reality, he has become Vishnu. ‘You have taken my work, my responsibility upon your shoulders, you have become the incarnation of Vishnu.’ So, every ‘Nishkam Karmayogi’, remember, is an incarnation of Vishnu or Krishna. He is not an ordinary person. If I have to manage my daily life with just 5000 rupees, then why would I earn crores? That's the point, isn't it? That's why 'karmanye vadhikaraste' Lord Krishna said: work with full vigor and enthusiasm while doing it. But when the result is achieved, do not have attachment towards it, and then live minimally and devote the remaining for the welfare of society. So, through that one Leela, a very small Leela from the 32nd chapter, but that one Leela imparts such a deep lesson This is such a Leela, if it is understood, if this thing touches our heart, and if we abide by living like that Then I tell you, the whole spirituality starts to churn in our minds. Because this is the essence, in reality, it is difficult to live, because what happens is that a person, after many millions of births,has come along living a selfish life, suddenly when this idea comes that, one must work hard and not even enjoy the fruits, then why should I work hard. I am expressing the perspective of an ordinary person, Is his mind stable, one should work hard, complete the task with full honesty, efforts should be given 100%, dedication should be 100%, and when in return the fruit is obtained, one should not enjoy that fruit, what nonsense is this? Today’s generation says. Bet tell me, this one Leela shatters all motivational speakers. After understanding this Leela, would you prefer to listen to any motivational speaker? It's over, the game is over, those thing will no more attract you, the way they end with, 'the fruit will be in your hands'. The whole game is in these words, they cleverly keep the conversation. “The fruit will be in your hands, work in the right direction, work with 100% enthusiasm, stay focused, stay dedicated, give 100% efforts, and keep a little patience, eventually the fruit will be in your hands, it will be, it will be.” This phrase 'the fruit will be in your hands' charges up a person greatly. And then a crowd of millions gathers in front of that person, because they have such a skill of speaking and talent. That's why I was saying, where motivation ends, spirituality begins from there. Questioner : whatever you said was understood well but a contradictory thing arises in mind that we are householder and while fulfilling the household responsibilities it becomes difficult to turn the mind towards Sai Baba so how should it be dealt? That's a very good question, an excellent question. Look, first of all those who are living a little consciously, such questions arise in their mind. Firstly, when we talk about ‘Nishkam Karma’, let’s suppose, I am currently working in an office. So, in the office, I have an 8-hour duty, right? So, those 8 hours, I have to put all my energy into it. I have to do what my boss expects from me. Not because my increment will increase, not because he will praise me in front of people, No. It's because Baba says to spend my life in ‘Nishkam Karmayog’. So, if I am working with complete honesty for those 8 hours, even if I don't remember Baba during that time, but after those 8 hours, when I connect with Baba, at that time, there will be no worldly desires, that's also guaranteed. Remember, those whose day passes well in ‘Nishkam Karmayog’ for 8-10 hours, when they sit with this scripture for 1 hour in the evening, then Baba won’t let their mind wander. And gradually, the power of worship will increase. ‘Nishkam Karmayog’ leads a person to worship. If you haven't done as much good and virtuous deeds throughout the day, then in the evening, you won't be able to fully focus and engage in reading this scripture for 45 minutes. So, if you want to give a good 45 minutes in the evening, then do complete justice with the 8 hours at your field of work. I hope Sai's Nishkaam karmayog is well understood one which apprehends mind, overcomes bane and calamities, annihilates ignorance, bestows deliverance, supreme benefactor, truth awareness and bliss giver mother of Sai, Sai incarnate, diadem of all scriptures, glory to shree Sai satcharitra divine book",
    "Description": "📖 श्री साईं सच्चरित्र | अध्याय ३२ – साईं बाबा का निष्काम कर्म योग 🙏\nॐ साईं राम 🙏\n\nइस अध्याय में श्री साईं बाबा ने अपनी दिव्य लीला के माध्यम से हमें यह सिखाया कि एक मनुष्य को कैसे निष्काम कर्म करते हुए, आसक्ति से मुक्त होकर न केवल अपने व्यक्तिगत (व्यष्टि) जीवन का धर्म निभाना चाहिए, बल्कि समाज (समष्टि) के प्रति भी अपने कर्तव्यों का पालन करना चाहिए।\n\n🔹 क्या है निष्काम कर्म का वास्तविक अर्थ?\n🔹 क्यों फल की इच्छा के बिना किया गया कर्म आत्मा को ईश्वर के और निकट लाता है?\n🔹 क्या एक सामान्य मनुष्य भी इस मार्ग से विष्णुपद प्राप्त कर सकता है?\n\nइस वीडियो में श्री कृष्णा जी की दृष्टि से यह स्पष्ट किया गया है कि:\n\n👉 जिस प्रकार भगवान श्रीकृष्ण को समझने के लिए अर्जुन जैसा समर्पित शिष्य बनना पड़ता है,\nउसी प्रकार बाबा की गहराई को समझने के लिए हमें भी एक महानतम भक्त बनना होगा — जो उनकी भावना, करुणा और शिक्षाओं को हृदय से अनुभव कर सके।\n\n🌼 यह वीडियो न केवल एक अध्यात्मिक ज्ञान है, बल्कि एक जीवनपथ है —\nजो हमें सिखाता है कि कर्म करें, परन्तु फल की अपेक्षा न करें;\nजुड़े रहें, पर आसक्त न हों;\nऔर जीवन को बाबा की दृष्टि से देखें।\n\n🙏 देखिए, जानिए और बाबा के इस अद्भुत निष्काम कर्म योग के संदेश को अपने जीवन में उतारिए।\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiCharitra #NishkamKarma #BhagavadGitaWisdom #KrishnaPerspective #SpiritualPath #SaiTeachings #karmayoga \n\n📖 Shri Sai Satcharitra | Chapter 32 – Sai Baba’s Path of Nishkam Karma Yoga 🙏\nOm Sai Ram 🙏\n\nIn this chapter, Sai Baba, through his divine leela (play), teaches us the essence of Nishkam Karma — selfless action without attachment. He shows how a person should fulfill their individual duties (vyashti) as well as their social responsibilities (samashti) while remaining detached from the fruits of their actions.\n\n🔹 What is the true meaning of Nishkam Karma?\n🔹 Why is action performed without desire for results considered the highest form of spiritual discipline?\n🔹 Can an ordinary person truly attain Vishnu-pada (the divine state) through the path of selfless action?\n\nIn this video, Shri Krishna Ji’s perspective helps us understand:\n\n👉 Just as one must become like Arjuna to truly understand Lord Krishna,\nin the same way, to grasp the depth of Sai Baba’s heart and teachings,\nwe must become the highest kind of devotee — one who surrenders fully and seeks to feel Baba’s compassion, wisdom, and intent deeply.\n\n🌼 This video is not just about spiritual knowledge, but about a way of life —\nA path where we act without attachment, serve without expectations,\nand begin to see life through Baba’s divine lens.\n\n🙏 Watch, reflect, and bring Baba’s profound teaching of Nishkam Karma Yoga into your life. …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "6,785 views",
    "Likes": "452"
  },
  {
    "Title": "कैसे करे नामस्मरण ? | By Krishnaji",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=109sQoRw2L8",
    "Transcript": "Yes, let's come to the question now. What is your name? Pawan, He say that the whole world talks about meditation. So should we also meditate on the name of the Baba? Can you show us a way? Look, I have a whole video on meditation. My request is, 'Sai Vani, what is true meditation?' If you visit Sai Leela rahasya channel you will get to watch this video. So first of all, 'What is meditation according to Baba's perspective?' I have made a whole video explaining that. you can watch it, but here, for everyone, my request is, develop a habit. Whatever name you chant. Whether you chant 'Om Shri Sainath Namah' or 'Om Sai Ram' which is your daily chant, or someone may chant 'Ram Krishna Hari,' see, the name has no diversity, it's just that one should pour love while chanting What is important that we should feel love for the name. The name should become so sweet, this world becomes insignificant. The love for the chanting it should be so intense that in front of it, worldly pleasures seem insignificant, the taste of food and the desire to drink doesn't remain, sleep seems like poison in front of it. All the pleasures of the world seem like dirt in front of it, the chant should become so sweet, so delightful, Develop a habit. if you spare 5 minutes?and in that 5 minutes if you close your eyes and chant the name, 18 times, if you can't do it 18 times, then do it 12 times. If you can't do it 12 times, then do it 6 times. But those 6 chants or at least keep it 18 times While chanting the name, Firstly, this name has to be spoken with great love in the mind. You have to speak with so much love and you have to listen with your ears to what you are saying with love from within. So speaking and listening, apart from this, do not let the mind wander until the name is chanted for 18 times. Start practicing it. And you Can Do it Anywhere anytime. But you have to do it repeatedly. Whenever you get time, close your eyes and chant it 18 times, with complete calmness, and with full focus. Chant the name slowly and with love. contemplate and listen And don't let your mind wander between speaking and listening for the time you chant for 18 times try this, you will tell me the result and then you have to do it again and again every day. If you can chant 18 times or if you can do for 50 or 20 times chant as much as you want but least 18 times. the mind will start becoming calm and concentrated. and slowly the love for chanting the name will erupt and if it does the any of worldly desire could not withstand in front of it",
    "Description": "नामस्मरण केवल ईश्वर के नाम का जप नहीं, बल्कि आत्मा को परमात्मा से जोड़ने की एक दिव्य साधना है। कृष्णाजी द्वारा बताई गई यह सरल परंतु गहन साधना आपके जीवन को बदल सकती है। \n\nभगवान का पवित्र नाम कम से कम 18 बार पूर्ण शांति और श्रद्धा के साथ जपें। इसे दिन में किसी भी समय, कहीं भी कर सकते हैं—बैठते हुए, चलते हुए या अपने कार्य करते हुए। इस 18 नामों के सत्र को दिनभर जितनी बार संभव हो, दोहराएं। \n\nप्रत्येक जप के साथ न केवल नामस्मरण होता है, बल्कि मन गहरे ध्यान में भी उतरता है। यह साधना मन को शुद्ध करती है, आत्मा को शांति देती है और हमें ईश्वर की कृपा के और निकट ले जाती है। \n\n🪷🪷🪷 \n\nNamSmaran is not just the chanting of God’s name—it is the key to merging the individual soul with the Supreme. As shared by Krishnaji this simple yet divine practice can transform your inner being. \n\nChant the holy name of God 18 times with complete peace of mind, anywhere, anytime—with devotion and surrender. Repeat this session as often as you can throughout the day. With every repetition, you are not only remembering God (NamSmaran) but also entering a state of inner stillness and Dhyan (meditation). \n\nThis sacred remembrance purifies the mind, awakens divine bliss, and brings the soul closer to its eternal source. Begin today, and let the holy name guide you to peace, devotion, and liberation. \n\n#namsmaran #meditation #spiritualpractice #saibaba #krishnaji #saileelarahasya #innerpeace #bhakti #divineconnection #mantrameditation\n\n\n🔴 स्वयं साई वाणी \"ध्यान\" किसे कहते है ? \n\n   • स्वयं साई वाणी \"ध्यान\" किसे कहते है ? / Dhyan   …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "6,318 views",
    "Likes": "511"
  },
  {
    "Title": "इसे कहते है पारायण? | By Krishnaji",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BNSJQo76l7c",
    "Transcript": "So the complete depth of Parayan has been spoken by Baba in different ways in all these Ovi in ​​different chapters and at different places and I have developed this subject by collecting all those Ovi from different chapters. Millions and millions of salutations at the feet of all Sai devotees. and this Sai Devsthan of Vadmukh Wadi, Alandi Road, Pune. I came here for the first time last night, but felt as if I had come to Shirdi. Such good vibes are seen in very few temples. Those of you who are settled here, you are all very fortunate. Having such a large temple in your area, along with so much purity and positive vibes, for always guiding you, settled in your city or village. So to the owner, millions of salutations at their feet, who have accomplished such a magnificent task. Whether they remain or not, their name will surely endure in the world. Today, I have been called here for the tenth anniversary (vardhapan divas) of recitation It's the tenth year. It's a Congregational recitation week. And today is the culmination day, the Avatarnika is complete today. Today marks the end of the week-long recitation, and on that occasion, I have been given the opportunity to speak. I am indebted to all of you for that.\" First of all, those who participated in this week. Millions of salutations at the feet of all of them. and many good wishes Because this weekly recitation of Sai Satcharitra happens very rarely. In reality, the importance of this week has been described at many places in Sai Satcharitra. What Sai Satcharitra is. How deep is each of it's verses. Baba himself has written them, so there is no question. If this is Baba's written scripture, then we people should realize the importance of analyzing or studying this scripture. And because of that, wherever Sai Satcharitra is read, it becomes a sacred land. What Baba says about Sai Sachcharitra in one chapter,Chapter 35 verse No. 218 to 220 I take this verses first. Baba says in 218th, \" ha satcharitra marg dhopat, jethe jethe yacha paath, tethech dwarkamai cha math, sai hi prakat nischaye\" ha satcharitra marg dhopat - The path of truthfulness is straight. It is not crooked. It is straightforward and provides complete clarity it is straight, ha satcharitra marg dopat, jetejete yacha paath - and wherever this Sai satcharitra is read. tethech dwarkamai cha math - Baba is saying that Dwarkamai is not just Shirdi. Wherever this Sai Satcharitra is recited, there is a monastery of Dwarkamai. sai hi prakat nischaye - and remember that Sai Baba appears there and listens to the reading. Meaning, wherever Sai Sachcharitra is recited, this scripture forces Baba to incarnate there. They reside in the heart of the speaker and speaks and they sit in the hearts of the listeners and listen. He resides into the heart of the speaker who speaks and in to the heart of listeners who listen So the one who speaks is Baba and the one who listens is also Baba. That is why saying - ha satcharitra marg dhopat, jethe jethe yacha paath tethech dwarkamai cha math - one word has been said 'tethech' meaning there put emphasis on this word, please So the true Dwarkamai is where this book is being read. you will have to go to Shirdi for physical aspect of Dwarkamai. Well, even after going there, you took entry in Dwarkamai but if you haven't studied the satcharitra, then those visits are incomplete. you have not seen Dwarkamai even after visiting it, if you haven't read a chapter, if you haven't gained entry into that chapter, then seeing it physically is equivalent to nothing. note this word 'tethech' (only there) 'tethech dwarkamai cha math, sai hi prakat nischaye' - and remember that wherever this book is recited, Baba becomes present there, incarnates, becomes aware, both within the speaker and within the listener. And further says - Tethech Godavari che tat, Tethech Shirdi shetra nikat Tethatch Sai Dhuni Sakat, Smarata, Sankat Niwari. Now in this verse he is saying that remember, there are the banks of Godavari wherever this holy book Sai Satcharitra is studied. 'tethech shirdi shetr nikat - and it is shirdi there 'thetech sai dhuni sakat\" - and the fire that Baba has lit in Dwarkamai to give wisdom and renunciation to the world, that fire also gets lit in everyone's heart there. 'thetch sai dhuni sakt, smarta sakat nivari' - When our mind starts enjoying the chapters, He removes all the troubles and problems of us, because see all the troubles that come in our life. They come because Baba is not present in our mind. And when Baba has not settled then Maya settles in. See, this is the mind, it never remains empty, either you make Baba settle it in your mind with your efforts. So you will remain in the light and mistakes will not occur. And if you have removed Baba from the mind, I mean you have forgotten Baba, then Maya takes up residence there and where Maya takes up residence in that mind, it will make you commit 50,000 mistakes and if mistakes are made then trouble is inevitable. So that is why Baba is saying that 'Samarta sankat nivari' - because if Baba is remembered, if Baba is kept in the heart, then there is no room for difficulties Because if there are no mistakes then where will the troubles come from? Because you are in the light, you are in the remembrance of Baba and if you are in the remembrance of Baba then there is absolutely no possibility of making mistakes. Understand each word carefully, please. 'Tethech Sai Dhuni Sakat Smarta Sankat Niwari' So there will be no crisis left and even if there is one, it will be washed away, it will go away. 'jethe sai charitra pathan tethe sadaiv sai nivasan' 'shradha purvak charitra vartan karita toh prassann sarv bhave' Now, are saying here - wherever Sai Satcharitra is read, Baba is present there only. It is not necessary that Sai is present only in the Samadhi temple of Shirdi, so Baba is speaking clearly here That wherever my Sai Satcharitra is recited, I reside there. And the one who recites this charitra with complete devotion and reads this charitra again and again or does it week after week (Saptahik Parayan), His day does not pass without reading a chapter of Sai Satcharitra Baba is always happy with such a devotee and his devotion. So this is the importance of Sai Satcharitra. And today you have dedicated the week to Sai Satcharitra. Today is the closing day, so on this auspicious occasion you have invited me here. So what is Sai Satcharitra, and what is its importance, Baba has beautifully put it in these three ovis. But each word should be read very carefully. Like I told you, \" Tethech Dwarkamai cha math\" The word 'tethech' you have to say it with emphasis. It is been said Words are very powerful. Words have great power. 'tethech dwarkamai cha math' - Meaning, even if you go to Shirdi and sit in Dwarkamai, but if you do not have the scripture (Sai satcharitra) in your hand and do not recite it, you are not in Dwarkamai. that is why 'tethech' is said And also here 'tethech godavari che tat' - And the place where Sai Satcharitra is recited is the banks of Godavari. 'tethech shirdi shetr nikat', please pay attention to these words 'te thech' (right there) Why is so much emphasis placed on this scripture? Because Baba himself wrote this scripture for us. Rather, the book itself is Baba. If I remove the book, if the book is not in my life then my wish will prevail, my wish has no value in front of Sadhguru. That(my wish) is nonsense. If I am a true devotee of Baba then I have to understand what Baba's will is. And if Baba's will is to be understood then Baba's own creation, Baba's own written, each and every word of this Sai Satcharitra should reach my heart in its depth. So this is the importance of Sai Satcharitra. I take another ovi, Chapter 41, in which it is said, \"krupa apali zhalya vin pothi vachne keval shin\" that if I read this book and if I do not have your grace then my reading is useless. It is useless labour. \"krupa apali zhalya vin pothi vachne keval shin samajne to tya hun hi kathin baba mi nikshun sangto\" if you don't have His grace, then holding this scripture in your hand and just listening is also difficult. Even holding a scripture in hand, the mind isn't concentrating. But still, somehow I managed to read a chapter or maybe complete a week, but my mind wasn't fully engaged. that too is difficult if we don't have His grace. I haven't been able to understand the meaning, but holding the book in hand and reading it without understanding is also difficult if I don't have your grace. And it is extremely difficult to understand its depth. Baba, I say this with full confidence. Baba says - 'baba vadati pothi padhta, farachi apan ghai karta, vacha pahu ki maj dekhta nikat baista maz pashi' Baba says that \"you hurry too much while reading this scripture (Sai satcharitra) One should not read this book in such a hurry. Come sit in front of me and read comfortably with a calm mind, understanding each word.\" So this is listening, this is reading. Otherwise you are deceiving yourself. See, you guys did Parayan today, so today I will have to speak only on Parayan. Therefore, what does this topic that I have discussed today mean in reality? I will come to that later. First Let me clear each and every word of Baba. In the fifteenth chapter, Baba says - 'shravan kele bhara bhar, pari avidye che tharavar thar te kai sharvanche pratyantar vyrth bharabhar shravn te' turning pages back to back, hastily as in the last verse baba says the you read the scripture hurriedly HE says same here as well - 'shravan kele bhara bhar' we read each page hurriedly. \"How much time is there?, it has to be completed in 15 minutes. we don't have time.\" Then read it with the speed of a rocket and finish it. And if you read a chapter in such a way, in spite taking millions of births and devoted it for millions of years, then also your heap of ignorance will not melt. 'shravan kele bhara bhar, pari avidye che tharavar thar te kai sharvanche pratyantar vyrth bharabhar shravn te' - such listening is futile I tell you the truth, don't feel bad. Collective Parayan (Samuhik parayan) is held once a year in Shirdi itself. Same thing happens there too Two priests sit in front, they have their own speed, because they have become experts in it. After reading it again and again, they have become habituated to it, they keep reading at their speed and those sitting below do not even know which line is being read. They don't even know which page is read. They keep searching for which page, which line etc is this a shravan? It hurts to see all this. If this message is sent from Shirdi itself, then the same will happen in other temples too. Don't you think so? And we feel that we have done a great job. Went to Shirdi and did parayan for a week. But couldn't even understand what the priest was reading.. Which line, page? The person was just searching lines and wasted his time and the priest finished reading with his rocking speed and left. This is called heavy listening/reading. Because it has to end at this particular time. Later there is aarti, there is food, this and that. what is this? And we call it a Tradition and people are offended to my words. This man speaks against the Sansthan. Is this called speaking against? It hurts, If you don't stop all this, centuries will go on like this. And if people see you saying that such a thing happens in Shirdi then we will also do the same. So what message do you convey? But the ignorance that exists does not disappear even a little. In contrast it is increasing. Even after listening to saintly stories ignorance is increasing. So will we call this Shravan(,Listening) Baba is asking?. If you listen with a true heart, you will see your mistakes. And you will work on your mistakes and eliminate your faults. You will be glowing from within. This is nonsense, this is not Parayan, this is not Shravan(Listening). You are deceiving yourself. Whenever I talk on these traditions, people get hurt. When i criticized Padyatra as this is not the right way Padyatra is done for penance and not for enjoyment. Felt bad. All the Pilgrims turned against. Today I am talking on sai satcharitra reading, this will also sound bad. Hey, I am not speaking, Baba is saying through sai satcharitra.. And if even four people out of a million who listened to me change themselves, then I will feel that what I said has been a success. What will happen next is that this man speaks against the Sansthan. Why would I speak against the Sansthan, what enmity do I have with it? But it is in a position of responsibility that whatever they do, the whole world looks upon them and repeats. So they should be more careful. This is the feeling. Because you are doing what Baba is opposing, reading hurriedly Neither the speaker has an idea of ​​its depth, nor the listener the false pride that we have completed reading of charitra is showed off nothing else happens although all the four Aaratis are by heart, meaning of even one is not known. such kind of listening is the reason for it and Look, Baba has given such a beautiful example and further says \" n ghade jeneni mal shalan, tyate kai mhanave saban, n kari je avidya nirasan te shravan mhanave\" How can you call it a soap if it is unable to wash off the dirt? And how would you call it listening that doesn't remove the ignorance within you? This is what Baba is saying It means that the reason for listening is because there is worldly filth within me, there is ignorance, and I need to wash away that ignorance. That's why I am listening to this Sai Satcharitra. And please, I humbly pray to you not to take this in a way that we called this person after completing our Parayan, and he started saying such harsh words. I humbly pray at your feet, please accept the truth. Otherwise, you will feel that our Parayan was completed, we thought he would say something good, but he said completely However, I know that you all have listened to me. And with clarity, you have invited me, and I am 100% confident that you will take my words positively. \" n ghade jeneni mal shalan, tyate kai mhanave saban, n kari je avidya nirasan te shravan mhanave\" no means this tradition of Parayan and weekly recitation is organized in many places but it is carried out as of this reading hurriedly no one takes a pause to understand the depth of Baba's leela. It is just about turning pages, but not about embedding Baba's words from his heart into your own heart then you are not human you are a machine Then it is becoming mechanical. And you are cheating yourself. No one else Parayan and Shravan you do. The result of that, after hearing it, understanding it, is to embody it in your actions. Simply reading and leaving it holds no significance even for the reading. Therefore, Baba says Chapter 21, Verse number 72 'vachile te nahi sample, pahije te krutit utarle, ya updya ghadya var toi otale taise zale te sakal' First of all, it's important to read attentively and understand what you're reading. And after understanding, one must act accordingly. And if you don't do this, no matter how many lifetimes you spend reading, reading, and reading, it's as if you were pouring water into an upside-down pot, not even a single drop entered it. So,Baba has spoken about the depth of Parayana, in all these verses in different ways at different places in different chapters, and I have gathered all these verses from different chapters and developed this subject. See, what we're doing is carrying forward the tradition of Parayana. ‘I have memorized all the four aartis’, so what? What to do with it? \"I have all four 'aartis' memorized by heart. I mean, I can sing the 'aarti' even louder than the priests who usually sing it.\" That's the competition. But what is the depth of that ‘Aarti’? No one knows. Everything is just done in the name of tradition. We engage in 'parayan' because our desires are fulfilled. Those who engage in 'parayan' with such sentiments are more in number. After reading this scripture, one will get to know what Baba wants, because this scripture is written by Baba himself. Baba even says that this scripture is he himself, so how carefully should one read it, how much emotion and devotion one should pour into reading it. But no one wants to. If we turn these mere pages, our desires will be fulfilled. There are more people who read it with this intention. I’ll tell you a story based on this topic, please try to understand it well. Once upon a time, a hunter goes into a forest to trap birds, please pay attention as I tell this story. Taking a net and grains he goes into the jungle, to trap the birds. He spreads the net, and throws grains on the net to lure the birds for feeding. All the birds come and sit on the net to eat the grains. And he keeps himself hidden behind a tree, waiting for around 100-150 birds to gather Once he sees them all, he pulls the net and traps them. Then he sells them in the market. This is his business. So one day, a monk was passing through the jungle and he sees this net spread out with grains on it. He thinks that someone might be laying a trap here. So he follows the strings of the net and finds a man sitting behind the tree ready to pull the string soon after all the birds sit on it, and trap them to take them away. Then the monk actually sees that the hunter pulls the net, and all the birds start fluttering inside, the hunter then carries them to the market and sells them. Some people captivate the birds, some eat it, and then the condition of those birds worsen. Now compassion arises in the sage’s heart, that the birds should be awakened, they should be enlightened. So, the sage begins to converse with those birds. He was a realized soul who had arrived there, so he starts conversing with the birds, saying, “You should understand that whenever you see grains in a trap, you shouldn't sit there, because the hunter throws that trap and leaves grains in it and when you go to eat them, you get trapped. So from today onwards, whenever you see grains on the net, don't eat them, remember my words, ‘the hunter will come, he'll lay the trap, he'll put grains, don't get trapped’. I repeat, ‘the hunter will come, he'll lay the trap, he'll put grains, don't get trapped’ .\" Now, all the birds that were there in the forest heard this message. Alright. The sage left, and these birds started to learn this by heart, \"the hunter will come, he'll lay the trap, he'll put grains, don't get trapped. The hunter will come, he'll lay the trap, he'll put grains, don't get trapped.\" Now, all these birds started to memorize this message, and one day the hunter came again, he laid the trap again, he put grains again. And now he's hearing \"the hunter will come, he'll lay the trap, he'll put grains, don't get trapped,\" so he says, \"Oh my, what's this? All the birds in the entire forest are shouting. But who taught them this?\" He becomes a little surprised, he thinks, \"I should just give up now, my business is ruined.\" He feels completely dejected and starts to wonder who came and who taught them this. Now they can’t be trapped, and he keeps thinking and pondering, in the meanwhile he falls asleep. The birds voices are still echoing. As they keep repeating this they catch the sight of the grains. They go back and sit on the net again, pecking at the grains, and they're also saying, \"the hunter will come, he'll lay the trap, he'll put grains, don't get trapped\", but they're still sitting on the net and pecking at the grains. And after a while the hunter wakes up and he sees all the birds trapped in the net but still chanting the same thing. So he thinks, \"My work is done,\" he then pulls them, ties them up again, and leaves. What does this story tell us? Our condition is also like that, we cram like parrots, 'the hunter will come, he'll lay the trap, he'll put grains, don't get trapped,' ‘This Parayana has to be done like this, the Saptah has to be done like this, turning pages swiftly, finishing in three hours. This Parayana has to be done like this, the Saptah has to be done like this, turning pages swiftly, finishing in three hours' 'The hunter will come...'. I hope what I have said has touched your heart. This is what we do and this is what we will continue to do until there is someone to explain properly. These traditions, these blind traditions, continue like this. What is the benefit of this, tell me? You've been doing this for 10 years now, please don't mind, I ask you all directly: if this Parayana is done in this way, then what's the point of 10 years? Even if you continue like this for 10 crore lifetimes, 'the hunter will come, he'll lay the trap...'.\" We will continue doing the same and will get misguided. So, this cannot be called a Parayana. Where the heart of the Baba has not opened, where the longing of Baba's heart has not been understood, where the mystery behind why he performed this miracle has not been understood. Listening indiscriminately, Betrayal, my friend. And you're betraying yourself, not anyone else. But if after waking up early in the morning, if one gets engrossed in a chapter. If you read a chapter with complete immersion. Then see how the whole day passes after leaving the house. But this is betrayal. And where do we learn this from? From Shirdi. They do the same in Shirdi. If they do same thing in Shirdi, then we should also do the same. But what am I saying, suppose, for you, if it takes three hours to do seven chapters or two and a half hours. I don't think you would even take three hours, so you would complete it in two and a half hours, so whoever has the speed, they are skilled. They have reached more. \"Oh, it takes you two and a half hours, I do it in two hours.\" as the topic arose i will tell you all might know Gajanan Maharaj of shegaon Gajanan Maharaj's gajanan Vijay Granth, which has 21 chapters is very short as compared to this Now there's a fuss about how many people have memorized it A lady memorized it and impressed the world. without looking she could recite the entire holy book on the life of Gajanan Maharaj And now. Seeing her, many people have started memorizing it. By heart starting from the first chapter to the end of scripture completely. As one has all the four Aaratis By heart What happens from that? If its essence is not understood, what is He saying in the first chapter? In the first chapter, these mistakes or defects in the character have been described, those defects are also in me. this is what Gajanan Maharaj is telling me I have to work on it. So, it means he has a sense but I have memorized the entire scripture. What happens from that? Then the same thing has to be repeated, the hunter will come...... listening indiscriminately just to turn pages. \"You take 2 hr 30 min, I complete it in 2 hours.\" And with great shame we talk about this. But what I'm saying, do the saptah not necessary that the all 53 chapters are completed. Not at all necessary. If this year, even seven chapters are completed but done well Baba would appreciate it. Completing the scripture, this is not the feeling. Instead How much did you understand have importance. Do Saptah If you can finish 7 chapters, so be it or 10 to 15 chapters, next year the remaining fifteen chapters will be completed. In this way in 3 years if entire scripture is completed, what difference does it make? But what is this, you have put a machine in place of yourself. Not human. This recitation is being done by a robot. There are no human emotions, no human sentiments, no human emotions are being stirred, the stream of tears is not flowing from the eyes, devotion is not surging, how can recitation happen? But whenever i Speak this truth, it hurts, feels bad. This man targets us. why should i do so? What will I get? Somewhere, a beginning has to be made, right? Somewhere, a revolution has to happen. So, from today onwards, promise me that from the next time, among you, there will be one person, one who. understands a little better. Place him and if seven chapters are completed in seven days, then seven be it. But do Saptah, that week of whole life, those 7 days are for Baba. Definitely do Saptah but as I'm saying, do it the way I'm saying. Please, I request you, Baba will dance in mirth Baba will celebrate. But what's happening now, it's all drama. Baba can't agree to this. So, today promise me that from next time, you will do the recitation as I'm saying. There will be one person among you. Who can explain the chapter well. Who can explain the verses well? such a person among yourselves and it is a duty to bow in front of someone who is better that us And our Sai devotees have a problem that they don't bow in front of anyone but Sai Baba This pride has not left our Sai devotees anywhere. We don't bow in front of any human. We bow in front of Sai, they speak it with pride. And Baba in his life time to suppress to crush his pride do not hesitate to seek refuge at the feet of deceptive Guru like Jawahar Ali So when will that much unselfishness come to us? After how many births will it come? That's why, in your own circle, whoever is a little higher than you, who can tell better, please bow before them. And gain the wisdom of Sai satcharitra from them, IN this way the enlightenment about Sai's true knowledge will reach the world. Otherwise. it will rot in the scripture itself. then this indiscriminate listening will persist It will never be curbed then this filthy tradition will go on continuously And then spending so much on it and so many people came for Parayan. Taking this as a pride. firstly you serve nonsense moreover you express pride over how many number of people came And there is no limit on spending money on it I hope you have explored what recitation means. And I haven't said anything from my side. Whatever Sai speaks in Satcharitra, I've kept that in front of you. so this indiscriminate listening is not a listening at all. What worship is that due to which tears don't flow from eyes. What listening is that? Which doesn't make your eyes wet. Above all, in the end. Kabir Ji has a couplet on it, I'll end it with that because without KabirJi, I feel no talk can be completed.\" KabirJi describes this as 'bhajdina kahu or hi, tan saadhu ke sanh, kahe kabir karigaji, kaise lage raang' meaning when i am reading scripture or chanting name or reading the holy book my eyes are on it but my mind is wandering else where I am moving my hand over the lines, reading the letters, but my mind is not focused on those letters, that speech, or that wisdom. 'bhajdina kahu oor hi' - meaning i am engrossed in other that what i m reading or chanting 'tan sadhu ke sang' - but i have engaged my body with sage here as scripture I have engaged my body with the company of saints, but my mind is occupied with thoughts of the entire world. 'kahe kabir karigazi' - this existence or body is a black cloth How can the color of the Master be manifested upon it? Have you ever seen color being applied to black cloth? That's why even during Holi, if we wear white clothes, completely white, so that color can be applied. But if you play Holi wearing black clothes, what's the point? And if you want to drench in Krishna's color, first you'll have to keep these clothes clean. 'bhajdina kahu or hi, tan saadhu ke sanh, kahe kabir karigaji, kaise lage raang' you have made it black cloth because you mind is not dwelling into it And when you are going on reading without presence of mind, then you have become black cloth, and even if the true Guru wants to dye you in his color, he won't be able to, because no color can be applied to black clothes. So, with this couplet the topic How Parayan should be performed? What is the correct way of Parayan? Shravan, How should one do it? How should one read a chapter? So, this is it. O enchantress! Remover of sorrows, destroyer of ignorance, bestower of liberation, supreme benefactor, embodiment of truth-consciousness-bliss, mother of Sai Nath, directly Sai incarnate, the queen of the scriptures, victory to the divine scripture, the glorious Sai satcharitra",
    "Description": "यह वीडियो पारायण के वास्तविक अर्थ और उसके जीवन में आचरण के महत्व को प्रकट करता है। पारायण केवल पढ़ने या सुनने का नाम नहीं है; यह वह साधना है जिसमें हृदय, मन और आत्मा को पूरी तरह श्रीसाईसच्चरित में डुबो दिया जाता है। लेकिन केवल श्रवण पर्याप्त नहीं है, उसका संदेश जीवन में उतारना और आचरण में लाना ही सच्चे पारायण की पहचान है। जब हम पूरे भाव, भक्ति और समर्पण के साथ इसका अभ्यास करते हैं, तभी इसका दिव्य सार प्रकट होता है। \n\nइस प्रवचन में कृष्णाजी यह बताते हैं कि स्वयं साईबाबा ने सच्चरित के महत्व को समझाया है और कैसे इसका श्रवण अज्ञान को मिटाकर ज्ञान और भक्ति के प्रकाश को जीवन में स्थापित करता है। अध्याय 35 की ओवी 218, 219 और 220 भक्ति की गहराई और साधक के पथ को स्पष्ट करती हैं। अध्याय 41 की ओवी 163 और 164 सच्चे भक्त के लक्षणों का वर्णन करती हैं। वहीं अध्याय 15 की ओवी 43 और 44 तथा अध्याय 21 की ओवी 72 में जीवन को सही दिशा देने वाले संदेश समाहित हैं। अज्ञानको दूर करने के लिए श्रीसाईसच्चरित का श्रवण और पठन करना है। \n\nयह प्रवचन हमें यह संदेश देता है कि श्रीसाईसच्चरित का श्रवण मात्र कथा-स्मरण नहीं है; यह एक आंतरिक साधना है जो मन को निर्मल करती है, आत्मा को जाग्रत करती है और भक्ति को जीवन का अभिन्न हिस्सा बनाती है। जब साधक इसमें पूर्ण भाव से डूबता है और बाबा के संदेशों को अपने आचरण में उतारता है, तभी पारायण का वास्तविक उद्देश्य सिद्ध होता है। \n\n🪷🪷🪷\n4ः05 साईबाबा साईसच्चरित के बारे मे क्या कहते है?\n4:21 श्रीसाईसच्चरित अध्याय ३५, ओवी २१८\n8:09 श्रीसाईसच्चरित अध्याय ३५, ओवी २१९\n10:49 श्रीसाईसच्चरित अध्याय ३५, ओवी २२०\n14:32 साईबाबाका सच्चा भक्त कैसे बने ?\n15:11 श्रीसाईसच्चरित अध्याय ४१, ओवी १६३\n16:58 श्रीसाईसच्चरित अध्याय ४१, ओवी १६४\n18:14 श्रीसाईसच्चरित अध्याय १५, ओवी ४३\n26:00 श्रीसाईसच्चरित अध्याय १५, ओवी ४४\n29:17 श्रीसाईसच्चरित अध्याय २१, ओवी ७२\n32:19 शिकारी आएगा, जाल बिछाएगा फसना मत (कहानी)\n38:00 कहानीकी सीख\n49:22 इबादत (भक्ति) ऐसी होनी चाहिए ।\n49:55 संत कबीर दोहा (भजदिना कहू ओर ही)\n51:35 होली में सफेद कपडे क्यो पहनते है ?\n🪷🪷🪷\n\n\nThis video reveals the true meaning of Parayan and emphasises the importance of living its teachings in daily life. Parayan is not merely about reading or listening; it is a spiritual practice where the heart, mind, and soul are fully immersed in the **Shri Sai Satcharitra**. But true Parayan goes beyond listening – it lies in absorbing its essence and putting Baba's teachings into action. Only when we practice it with devotion, mindfulness, and surrender does its divine wisdom manifest in our lives. \n\nIn this discourse, Krishnaji explains how Sai Baba himself spoke about the significance of the Satcharitra and how its recitation removes ignorance, awakens divine consciousness, and nurtures devotion. Verses 218, 219, and 220 of Chapter 35 reveal the depth of devotion and guide a seeker’s path. Verses 163 and 164 of Chapter 41 describe the qualities of a true devotee. Verses 43 and 44 of Chapter 15 and Verse 72 of Chapter 21 carry profound messages that direct life towards spiritual growth. To dispel ignorance, one must listen to and read the Shri Sai Satcharitra. \n\nThis discourse conveys a powerful truth – listening to the Shri Sai Satcharitra is not just storytelling; it is an inner practice that purifies the mind, awakens the soul, and establishes devotion as a living force in daily life. When a devotee immerses deeply and brings Baba’s teachings into their conduct, the true purpose of Parayan is fulfilled. \n\n#SaiBaba #SaiSatcharitra #Parayan #SpiritualWisdom #SaiDevotion #SaiBhakti #SaiTeachings #ShirdiSai #SaiMiracles #SaiLeela #SaiKrishnaJi #DivineWisdom #BhaktiMarg #SaiSamadhiMandir #SpiritualJourney …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "20,237 views",
    "Likes": "874"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई आज्ञा - गुरु आज्ञा",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3UyPRBzVvE8",
    "Transcript": "And if one left Shirdi without Baba's permission, horse carriage turned upside down. Either some other problem came, missed the train, did not get anything to eat or drink, which means had to fast till night, got exhausted, there are many such stories. But, I have a question. Why are all these stories recorded like this? Is it Baba's dominance? Chapter twenty-two, Amir shakkar. The story of Amir shakkar. Must have read many times. But today when the mysteries behind it will open Perhaps you will not be able to forget this story throughout your life. This is a story of disobedience. Amir Shakkar, native-Korade Taluka, Kopargaon. And was residing in Bandra in Bombay. The caste was khatik, Amir shakkar suffers from a form of rheumatic fever. There is stiffness in the entire body. There is swelling and so much pain that there is no limit. Every kind of vaid (traditional healer) and treatment is tried, but from nowhere he is benefited. So he comes to know about Baba and he feels that let's go to Shirdi once and try. And they take refuge in Baba to get relief from arthritis. Now see, actually he was suffering from arthritis, he wanted to get rid of arthritis, hence he took refuge in Baba, but the medicine given to him by Baba was completely opposite. Baba said to stay in Chavadi for nine months. This incident happened before 1910. There was a lot of improvement in Shirdi after 1910. Many people joined, Dwarakamai was renovated, Chavadi was renovated but the description about Chavadi before 1910 is so terrible that one dare not ask. there used to be potholes upto knees in the chavadi of small size. And the walls were just standing without roof and the walls were wet. It was the habitat for snakes, scorpions and lizards. So he was already suffering from rheumatism and Baba showed him the place Chavadi and said, staying there for nine months is his medicine. That person felt that how could this be a medicine? Any doctor who knows even a little about arthritis will not send anyone to such a place even by mistake. Where it is so cold, so humid, so wet. So, on the contrary, that place will increase my arthritis disease infinitely, but still the whole world says, do what He says. He have asked you to stay there for nine months, so staying there is your medicine. So, he resides there but day by day troubles increase. Three months, four months, five months, a few months are sustained because of faith. But for how long will the faith support? Because the disease is not getting cured but the pain is increasing. And if it rains then its more terrible. The condition of Chavadi as in described in charitra becomes so poor that even a dog would shun the place. This detrimental the place was. So the poor guy manages to do as much as he can. In the end he cannot endure. He thinks that if he seeks for permission from Baba, He will say,\"hey, I told you to stay for nine months.\" and you are talking about leaving now. he thinks if ask the question than i won't be able to answer so it is better that I quietly leave from here without telling anybody. It's enough now I have tolerated as much as I could, now it's not in my control. Patience gives in And without a word, one day he leaves quietly and it is written that Before dawn, that is, before the sun rays rise, that not a single person should be seen in Shirdi without falling in anyone's sight Who knows if someone sees, they might go and tell Baba, 'Look, he was told not to stay for nine months, That person is leaving So that I may be seated again. So, therefore, early in the morning, exactly around four or four thirty he sets out of shirdi Now his misfortune that he reaches Kopargaon in a orphanage. So he stays in the dharamshala. There is an old man in the dharamshala. He is on the verge of death, that his life can end at any moment. perhaps the children have compelled to leave his house. He is living an abandoned life and is on the decline of age. He has reached old age and now or then perhaps death is near. That poor guy says asks for water to quench his thirst So, this is what Amir shakkar thinks, ' this poor is a guy dying of thirst.' So, he takes a glass of water and goes to him to give it to him. As soon as he drinks it, that guy leaves this world As soon as he passes away, Amir starts feeling nervous, thinking, \"What is this? I had a very genuine feeling that he was thirsty, so I gave him two cups of water to drink.\" And as a result, this guy passed away. Tomorrow morning, everyone will come to know that this man died here and that he (amir) was also in the room with him. \"I will be trapped,\" he said. \"There will be a police case. when I went to do something good, it turned out to be very bad. No, Baba, this was a mistake. I did not follow your orders. That's why you played a game with me,' So believing this, he came back as quietly as he went and then gradually settled in Chawadi. So Baba knows how to pull someone meaning if once He said,\" You should do this work.\" There is just a delay in coming out of his tongue. Then, no matter how much we try to avoid it, We may try our best to rebuke it, but Baba gets the job done. This can be understood from the story If it comes out of His mouth that 'you will do this work,' then He makes it happen at any cost. This is His compassion. Then, even if we try to stop it in every possible way, even if we try to reject it in every possible way, but no, Baba completes that task. So now see, giving water to a dying person is a greater act of virtue. his last wish is thirst; he was dying of thirst, and this person went and gave two sips of water, and that person was supposed to attain heaven, But now the question is, what does this story want to convey? Why has Baba included this story? This is something we all read in Sai Satcharitra; we all know it. However, through a story, what do He want to enlighten us about? It's very important. He want to convey that by going beyond my command, no matter how great a charitable deed you do for the world, the outcome will always be negative. I'll repeat. \"By violating my command, by crossing my command, no matter how much noble work you do for the world, no matter how much virtuous work you do, no matter how much good deed you do, its consequence will be dreadful That's why Kabir Ji says, 'By violating the guru's command, wherever the disciple goes, Wherever he goes, there is death.\" Kabir explains this. Wherever he goes by violating his command, there death looms over him because it does not have the command of the true guru for. So the importance of the guru's command is so profound. This story is conveying that by violating the guru's command, no matter how high, no matter how virtuous deeds you perform, its consequence will be dreadful. Now see, there is a leela completely opposite to this. In the very next chapter of Kaka Saheb Dixit, these are in twenty-second and twenty-seventh chapters respectively. To slaughter a goat. What in this world could be as criminal as goat slaughter? For a person who lives a spiritual life. what could be a bigger crime than committing violence? But there Sadhguru's order is to slaughter the goat, but first of all Baba doesn't do this leela with everyone. The person in front should also reach that stage only then will he give orders. What does Kaka Saheb Dixit say there? Meaning, Kaka Saheb Dixit is not making the mistake that Amir Shakkar did. Kaka Saheb Dixit is saying that Baba Because of what your command, I'm going to slaughter it. I'm going to do this violence in return. Even if I get hell, I will accept it because with your permission I will get that hell. This is faith, meaning by staying under your orders, Baba, even if I have to suffer hell for every moment, i am willing to accept it, but by disobeying your orders, even if I get heaven, I don't want it So, it's completely reversed. Amir Shakar's story is completely against Kakasaheb Dixit's story, now look, it's the ninth chapter. In the ninth chapter, is all about Guru's wish They used to say in front of Baba that Baba, we are leaving now, it had been three days since we have stayed but Baba didn't say anything and they had to wait for two days. Coming here is not in your control, and leaving from here is not in your control until I give the command. You won't leave Shirdi.\" Our life today, we are very fortunate. Baba is not in physical form. If on today's date, Baba said, \"you will stay for four months or seven months.\" I don't know how many people could stay here to be very honest. We people, after booking a return ticket, come here. Some come in the morning, but at night their return journey is booked. Baba used to stop some people for seven months in those times. And khaparde used to ask Baba permission to leave, and Baba used too deny it. And letters were coming from home, letters from the family. In those days, he was very prominent members of the Bar Council, so there was a political pressure on him. Again he went to ask the permission to leave with a letter demanding his need in workplace but Baba was adamant. In this way he was made to stay for seven months If a person has come here today. Suppose Baba appeared in his dream and said that the person will go here after 5 days. He had come saying at home, \"I am going in the morning and will come in the evening\" and if he obeys Baba and stays for 5 days, his household will not be saved. The household will be in danger. What days those were, what people they were. What faith they had and their wives too. If Baba had made to stay. So it's good for everyone. It is good for all of us, but here the husband is different, the wife is different, that feeling was not there then. If Baba has made to stay the husband, then it is for the good of all of us, this was faith. Well see in 9th Chapter, no one left Shirdi without taking permission from Baba. No one left Shirdi. And if I left Shirdi without Baba's permission, then horse carriage turned upside down. Either some other problem came, missed the train, did not get anything to eat or drink, which means had to fast till night, got exhausted, there are many such stories. But, I have a question. Why are all these stories recorded like this? Is it Baba's dominance? If you don't obey my command, then I'll show you the stars in broad daylight What is the purpose? He used to do it for good, undoubtedly, actually the real purpose behind it is that Baba is sowing a seed today by explaining the importance of obedience, that if you stay in my command today, you'll listen to what I say, I'll give small commands, nothing big. Wait for 2 days, wait for 4 days, this is not a huge command. it isn't a problem as big as to slaughter a goat that was given to kaka saheb dixit. Baba is saying, 'Wait for 4 days, if you wait for 4 days, you'll stay in the light, you'll stay close to me, and four good things will fall on your ears some virtuous values will be built so with that feeling he used to say to stay in shirdi He is nurturing these small things within us like seeds. For He says, \"Keep following these small commands because one day I have to give a very big command, and do you know what that command is - that I am You and You are Me. The day I give this command to you without any doubt, without any suspicion, that should enter within you, and as complete as I am, you will also become complete. \"My aim is to take you to that command therefore i am giving you such small commands\" \"So , i am preparing you for that command and if you feel that i am putting pressure on you that I always keep you under my command, then my main motive behind it is only that one day I can shed light on great utterance (Mahavakya) \"Tat Tvam Asi,\" in your heart \"Tat Tvam Asi\" I am the complete Brahma, you are also the same, I have to instill these sentences and these commands in you, that time as you have been following my every order for years, then your ego will not stand against this sentence of mine. That's why if you disobey these small commands of mine, Baba says, \"what difference does it even if I break your hands and legs and put you in the hospital of Kopargaon. And if in return you learn that you should not go beyond their permission, then the deal is cheap. Even if he had taken a lesson to heart after stumbling so much, I would say that the deal is cheap. So this is Baba's order. How terrible are the consequences of disobeying Baba. And if we follow the orders and if we learn to obey the orders, if it becomes our habit to keep following his orders, then one day He has to give us the final orders. That there is no difference between you and me. We both are complete Brahma. So He wants to take us to the final level of command, that is why in the beginning He is preparing us by giving small commands. So these things should be clear. O enchantress! Remover of sorrows, destroyer of ignorance, bestower of liberation, supreme benefactor, embodiment of truth-consciousness-bliss, mother of Sai Nath, directly Sai incarnate, the queen of the scriptures, victory to the divine scripture, the glorious Sai satcharitra",
    "Description": "🕉️ श्री साईं सच्चरित्र | अध्याय २२ | श्री अमीर शक्कर जी की कथा\n🎙️ कृष्णाजी की भावमयी वाणी में एक अत्यंत दिव्य प्रसंग\n🎧 A sacred narration by Krishnaji, resonating with deep spiritual insight\n\nयह केवल एक कथा नहीं, यह उस दिव्य आज्ञा का स्मरण है, जिसे गुरु साईं बाबा ने अपने भक्तों को आत्मोन्नति हेतु प्रदान किया।\nश्री अमीर शक्कर जी, जो शारीरिक कष्टों से जूझ रहे थे, उन्हें बाबा ने चावड़ी में निवास की आज्ञा दी — एक ऐसी जगह जहाँ रुकना उनके लिए सहज नहीं था।\nकिन्तु यह आज्ञा केवल बाहरी स्थान का संकेत नहीं थी — यह थी अंतःकरण की परीक्षा, श्रद्धा की अग्नि-परीक्षा।\n\n🌼 क्या गुरु की आज्ञा कष्ट नहीं, करुणा होती है?\n🌼 क्या शरीर की पीड़ा आत्मा के विस्तार का मार्ग बन सकती है?\n🌼 क्या अवज्ञा, चाहे वो अच्छे उद्देश्य से क्यों न हो, आत्मिक पतन का कारण बन सकती है?\n\nIn this sacred chapter, Sai Baba reveals the deeper essence of Guru Bhakti — that the Guru’s command is not bound by logic, but soaked in divine wisdom.\nShri Amir Shakkar’s silent submission becomes a living message:\n\n\"The path to liberation is carved through surrender, not comfort.\"\n👉 Through Krishnaji’s spiritually charged voice, this video explores the transformative power of Guru Agya (the Guru's command) — how following it without resistance, even in suffering, opens the gates of divine grace.\n\n💫 गुरु केवल राह नहीं दिखाते — वे स्वयं राह बन जाते हैं।\nउनकी आज्ञा पालन में जो पीड़ा दिखे, वह वास्तव में हमारे भीतर की अपवित्रताओं का दहन होती है।\n💫 The Guru’s command is a sacred fire. What seems like suffering is truly purification, leading to the blossoming of the soul.\n\n🙏 इस अद्भुत लीला को श्रवण करें, हृदय से अनुभव करें, और अपने जीवन में उतारें।\nबाबा की कृपा वहीं उतरती है, जहाँ आत्मा नतमस्तक हो जाती है।\n🙏 Let this divine Leela echo in your heart and become your guiding flame on the path of devotion.\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiSatcharitra #Chapter22 #Krishnaji #GuruBhakti #SaiUpadesh #SaiLeela #SpiritualSurrender #चावड़ीलीला #साईंआज्ञा #श्रद्धासबुरी …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "6,429 views",
    "Likes": "416"
  },
  {
    "Title": "संसार की सबसे बड़ी कमजोरी ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bqsBD7RRris",
    "Transcript": "I say this Leela is the gateway of the Sai satcharitra. from this 3rd chapter a true devotee takes an entrance into Baba. It is a doorway of Sai satcharitra. because human's two biggest weaknesses are Kamini (lust) and Kanchan (money). A Rohila, a Muslim Pathan, engrossed and intoxicated with devotion for Baba, resides in Shirdi and as he is a Muslim by religion he used to recite the verses from Quran or chant Allah-o-Akbar in a deafening voice and it went for day and night The village was small, but his voice was harsh and heavy. The chanting of 'Allah-O-Akbar' would reverberate throughout the entire village, a heavy and intense voice. He sees neither day nor night neither dawn nor dusk, when he is stirred by emotion, he starts chanting of 'Allah-O-Akbar' in his harsh voice, echoing the entire village,. The villagers some how tolerates this behavior of him for some days but when they are overwhelmed by it as they toil hard for entire day in fields and in the evening when we are back to our abode exhausted then this man won't let us sleep for he neither sees night nor day and recites verses of Quran loudly so our sleep is being hindered, considering this and also Rohila was a free-spirited individual. People was afraid to confront him during that era Hence they thought if they approach that Rohila, it could take a turn for the worse so its better to approach Baba directly with the supplication So, if they take this concern to Baba, saying, \"Baba, please handle this person; he is causing a disturbance in our peace,\" the entire village gathers together. A plan is then formed to lodge a complaint against this individual. and So, they go to Baba and say, \"Baba, please intervene and restrain this person; he is causing trouble and disrupting our peace. we toil in our fields for entire day and come home exhausted and we don't even receive a peaceful sleep after evening because of his prayers so please make him understand making him understand is far-off rather Baba tells them a story that his wife Rohili is very resolute and contaminated woman As soon as he stops reading verses, his wife rushes toward me and starts bothering me. but until the voice of his verses is echoing and his chant of Allah-o-Akbar is alive his wife's reach is limited to his home but as he stops reciting the verses his wife starts bothering me. This has been Baba's response. therefore Don't get involved in Rohila's affairs. Let him yell as per his will. The day when his goal is accomplished he will stop automatically. so because of him my nights are passing peacefully, Otherwise, I will become troubled because of his wife.\" This is what Baba is responding to the villagers The villagers are very surprised. What was the question, and what is the answer? We had asked Baba a very straightforward and simple question, requesting Baba to silence this man a bit. But Baba, instead, narrated metaphorical stories to us, and Where his wife is that She will go to Baba and cause trouble. But Baba is Baba; any of his actions or words cannot be without reason. Since it is the discourse of the capable Sadguru, it cannot be without reason. So, in the end, even in the scriptures, it is mentioned that he was dependent on money. Life, for him, is lived in poverty, lived in destitution. Where will his wife be, and what trouble will she cause Baba by going to him? If there is no wife, then who will cause trouble to Baba? But people think, If Baba himself has permitted this, What can we people do? they endured everything and with that, the story ends there. Now the question is, what is Baba telling behind the story? what are his teachings? What kind of impurity or flaw is Baba trying to hint at or shedding light on? It's not just a story about Rohilla; it's about all of us First of all, let's make it clear that every person sitting here has a Rohilla hidden in them. So, it's not just Rohilla's story; it's everyone's story. which impurity or flaw is Baba hinting at? Why is Baba facing difficulties?\" lets understand this story precisely. First of all, Baba says that as the rohilla stops reciting the verses his wife leaves his home and comes to trouble me As soon as he begins reading the verses, his wife turns back to him. It is clearly written in the Sai satcharitra that Rohilla had no wife So what's the matter? What game is this? What is the secret of this?, Baba, who is speaking here, is not the one seated in Dwarkamai, First, understand this: the Baba, who is seated in the heart of Rohilla as the inner guide, is uttering, these words Clarify this first. Baba, who is seated in Dwarkamai, is not uttering these words that \"his wife comes to me\" rather in the heart of Rohilla, where Baba is seated as the inner guide. He is saying that as long as he(Rohilla) remains in the worship of God, as long as he remains in the remembrance of God, he utters the slogan \"Allahu Akbar\" (Allah is Great). When he reads the verses of the Quran, until then, his wife, meaning the impure thoughts in his mind, towards other women, the lustful desires that arise in his mind towards other women, that woman (lust) gets submerged in that light but as he As soon as he stops reading the verses, he ceases to chant 'Allahu Akbar', he stops the worship for Allah, he forgets Him then she comes to Baba who is seated into his heart that Rohilli, and troubles the Baba within there is no linkeage of the Baba seated in Dwarkamai with this Leela what Baba is trying to convey through this leela that o individual one thought resurrecting in your mind troubles Me the One seated in your heart because i watch your heart your mind your unvirtuous thoughts every moment vigilantly when one immoral thought take birth within you, i am then troubled because it heads towards me so even if you aren't careful for yourself but it is an attempt to say atleast you should stay away from these feelings for knowing I am present in you, You go to sleep, but I stay awake. You forget after committing a crime, but I am not able to forget. Because I am alert 24 hours a day and I know every single thought in your mind If you bring even one wrong thought inside you, then I feel pain. So at least you may not care about yourself, but at least care about me after today. That I will get hurt. If one wrong thought arises inside at least try to control your thoughts in this regard. Now let me ask you a question, we all are devotees of Baba. We cannot see Baba today, That's why we are able to do devotion. Today, Baba is not physically present in front of us for twenty-four hours. That's why mistakes happen freely assume one day Baba appeared in front of us physically and said, \"Krishna, after today I want to be with you 24 hours a day, I want to be in front of you.\" will you commit a sin? will you commit any sin? Sins happen because Baba is not in front of me, this is the belief, but that person who knows that my Baba is more alive inside me than me. He is more aware than me and will desist from committing crimes. If even one wrong thought comes, tears will flow from his eyes, indicating that the matter has reached Baba. My Baba felt troubled; my Baba was in pain. Forgive me Baba, but after today, I will not forget your remembrance even for a moment so that this Rohilli won't trouble me. These vices won't torment me, won't take me under its control. So, this is a very deep Leela. There is a verse, where Baba says. \"Lakshya lavi jo maj kade nahi taya kaichi hi sakade This ovi is in marathi which means the person who keeps his focus on me. always remembers me, conceives me in his thoughts, never forgetting me even for a moment There is no room for such vicious feelings in his life. But as soon as you forget me, Maya (illusion) hunts you down, chasing and striking you relentlessly To forget Him even for a moment means death, and to keep Him alive every moment means life. Forgetting Him for a moment is as if the throne of the heart is and on the right side Baba is standing, and on the left side Maya is standing Listen carefully. On the right side of our heart, Baba is standing and on the left side, Maya is standing and both are also watching alertly. To whom does this person give the seat to sit? Baba looks whether he gives seat to Him or Maya if he wants to give it to me then Maya has no power to consolidate it as Baba is already seated but no sooner did you forget Baba than you picked him and made to stand that very moment Maya possesses the seat So this leela is very deep. As soon as he have forgotten Me even for a moment, Maya will occupy the throne of his heart and will control you from moment to moment. She will take you under her control and will make you do so many wrong things that later you will have nothing else but regrets. So Baba is saying either remember me every moment and make me sit on the throne of your heart with all your might or you forget me and or you make a Maya sit, but that throne even for a moment. Does not remain empty. Either Baba or Maya Maya took possession of your mind as soon as you forget Baba. Now Baba is asking He or Maya? It is in your hands. Whom do you want to make sit? You want Baba to make that heart sit. But Baba sitting in Dwarkamai is not saying is that his(Rohilla) wife is very wicked. Even for a moment if you forget me and she comes to me, These words are not spoken by the Baba who is sitting in Dwarkamai, our Antaryami Baba is speaking. And the Baba who is residing in all of us is saying this. You forget me for a moment and at that very moment Maya is standing beside you and she becomes present. He is bigger than us, more alert than us, more powerful than us. I hope you are able to understand this Leela very well. This is a very important Leela of Sai Sachcharitra. And I call this Leela of Sai Sachcharitra Granth as a gateway. From here a true devotee takes entry in Baba. This is the gateway, it is the third chapter of Sai Sachcharitra. human's two biggest weaknesses are Kamini and Kanchan. One is money. Fame, status, position and the other is man's attraction for woman and woman's attraction for man. These two weaknesses are very dangerous. So Baba is explaining to us through this Leela. You have to be very cautious. Otherwise you will slip or go so far that you will not be able to turn back. This is Sai's devotion. Forget this, it's death. Remember it, and it's life. So this third chapter That's why Baba has kept this one leela in the third chapter. And this leela is the beginning of Sai Sachcharitra, That's why I say this is the gateway. So it is a very important leela. Now, I going to play a song. It's a movie song. Do listen the song carefully first, 'Innhi logo ne le lina dupatta mera' See, this is a song from the movie Pakeezah of 1971. It is a very classic movie if you have the right vision to watch it. But this song is written so deeply. If you are watching then you feel that there is a brothel and a prostitute who is dancing and singing to woo some people. Maybe it looks like this to you, but no. It is not so, it is a very deep song, because when I will unfold each line, whatever mindset you may have had about the song will be washed away. A different feeling, a different wisdom you will leave with. This is the guarantee. 'Inhi logon ne le leena dupatta mera.' Now the prostitute is saying that these are the people who have snatched my dupatta. Which people? And why is she saying this? Hamri na maano bajajva se poochho Jis ne asharfi gaz deena dupatta mera So don't listen to me. Maybe I am lying, you might think so but I am telling you. These are the people who have snatched my scarf. These are considered to be the most advanced people of the society. They are considered to be the contractors of the society. These are considered very high professionals of the society. These are considered to be very ethical people of the society, but it is these people who have snatched my scarf. These are those people. So they say. 'Hamri na maano bajajva se poochho' So you may not believe what I say, but the seller of clothes One who sells cloth listen to him. In Ashrafi, in those times, one Ashrafi might be worth a penny. In one Ashrafi, he gives a whole yard of fabric, meaning three to four meters.He is filled with so much compassion that he cannot see someone in distress. This person is filled with so much goodness. If I ask for a little cloth, he gives a whole yard. He does so much charity. But when desire arises in him. then he forgets all his deeds and is forced to commit crimes like a fish. is allured at the sight of earthworm when immersed in water. Similarly, this man embodies goodness that transcends borders But as soon as it comes to this matter of vice, he is forced to commit crime. That's why she says Don't agree with me. Ask this cloth merchant. If I ask for half a meter of fabric, he will give four meters to cover myself well He is so clean. He is a person with chaste character, but when it comes to Kamini (indulgence of sensual pleasure), when it comes to desires, this guy becomes weak. I mean, in this song, an attempt has been made to tell that a person, A person can overcome any weakness, but these treacherous and difficult passes like Kamini and Kanchan cannot be crossed without the grace of the spiritual guide. these are those passes which are impossible even if you take million births, if Sadguru has mercy on you, you will be saved. Otherwise, you will be trapped. Hamri na maano bajajva se poochho Jis ne Jis ne asharfi gaz deena dupatta mera hamri na maano rangrajva se poochho The one (rangrajva) who colors the clothes, does different paintings on it, makes different prints, adds beauty to the clothes. Meaning, his feeling is that when he does something for the society, he is a very noble person. He is a very highly ethical person. He has compassion and kindness in his heart, he does his work the best he works to make the world colorful. But poor guy. When the question of Kamini comes, when he gets into the trap of Kamini, he gets completely trapped in such a way that neither his conscience works, nor his surrender to the True Guru works, nothing, he is forced to commit this crime. Hamri na maano rangrajva se poochho Jis ne Jis ne gulaabi rang deena dupatta mera Meaning he colors my clothes, shields my dignity, protects my respect but when the same is deceived by sensual desires, he easily forgets all his conscience and is compelled to commit a crime, This is the song which exposes such a part of human character, exposes such a weakness which is hidden in every human being and without overcoming it, Baba is not going to be reached by us In last and the third satnza she says,\"Hamri na maano sipahiya se poochho.\" Don't listen to me, he will say, who is this constable or who is this police officer, ask him As a police officer, he has saved the honor of countless girls. However, when that desire arises in him, he then forgets all his lifelong virtues That's why I have described it as door. this leela is the gateway. So it is a very important leela. 'hamri na mano sipaya se puchoo'. Impossible to know how many lives he might have saved, How many people would this police officer have saved from humiliation? But when he comes into contact with this desire, he doesn't even realize when he committed a mistake. Meaning, these desire for sex and money is a thing from which one should always stay away from these two things. This song alerts us. It exposes that thing of human character which is hidden in all of us. So the song is sung by a prostitute, but she is also revealing the character of someone who is called a great person of the society. This is a song that reveals the character of a civilized citizen of a civilized society Because this weakness is hidden in every human being. The one who defeated this, reached His refuge and the one who slipped here, just kept slipping. Now see, there is a couplet of Kabir ji on this, if I do not take it, then this leela will be called incomplete. 'chalo chalo sab koi kahe' - Everyone talks about walking on the path of spirituality. 'chalo chalo sab koi kahe pohche birla koi' - If millions set out then some rare one will reach the destination as there is a verse in the Bhagavad Gita 'manushya naam sahestreshu'. Out of thousands, someone tries to walk on this path And among those thousands, any one truly understands me\", has been said by Lord Krishna why does he say this? Because these two things (sex and greed) mislead the best of the best. If they mislead the saints and ascetics then how will the common people be saved? 'chalo chalo sab koi kahe pohche birla koi ek kanak aur kamini durgam ghati doye' He said On the path of spirituality, these are worse than the Himalayas. These two. It is impossible to get them crossed without guru's compassion It is impossible. That is why if with that much alertness if we remember the Lord, we will be saved. And if we don't have that much alertness then we are sure to drown. There is no doubt in this, So this leela exposes all these delicate emotions. So how cautious should one be with respect these two kanak and kamini these leela conveys this exquisitely And above all I should remember that even if a wrong feeling arises in my mind then my inner Baba gets hurt. Because though I am sleeping, my Baba is present inside me. He is alive and aware. He is watching me every moment. He sees my every state of mind, every thought of mine, He feels pain. Therefore, when those thoughts come, immediately immerse yourself in the remembrance of Baba. Somehow, fall out of the contaminated mind, otherwise it will take you so far that perhaps you will not be able to return. when we start treading this path sincerely we need to cross this two huge passes and with those our spiritual practice deepens on one hand they have negative aspects and on the other they strengthen one's spiritual practice. So, here the leela ends OM SAI RAM Essence of this leela. First lesson-In this Leela, Rohila's wife, who is an imaginary character and who has been addressed abusively,is not a physical woman who is coming out of the hut to Baba at Dwarkamai. Here in this Leela, Rohila's impure mind has been called as his wife. And Baba here is the symbol of the inner person living in the heart of Rohila. Perhaps it is only for the believers like Rohila that Kabir ji says,\"I went out to search for evil. when searched me within, there is no one worse than me\". And now here's second and important lesson. Through this leela, it seems as if Baba is saying to us that o! people of the world you are so trapped in the worldly affairs that you do not have the time to think about yourselves to become perfect by finding flaws. Illusionory lightning of this deceptive world and it's playfulness and pleasures and you have thousands of desires to achieve them and crores of wishes, all this is the reason for your living. But the reason for my living is an ordinary person like Rohila. Who is working hard on the evils of his mind. Although my size and expanse are so big that I cannot fit anywhere. But yes, I can be imprisoned very easily and happily in the cave of the heart of a person like Rohila And now the third and last lesson of this leela. In this story, the favor that Baba has shown to Rohila. The encouragement He has given for reading the verses in a voice that is troubling the entire village. Is in reality, the appreciation of the faith present in that person Towards the helplessness, compulsion and helplessness of that person. Baba's tolerance and compassion is clearly visible. Baba was never in favor of any religion. He was in the favor of righteousness which is above religion. In fact, even today he is in favor of it. But yes, it cannot be the right of any religion to trouble the society in any way in the name of faith. This is what my heart says on this whole leela. This whole universe I have immense love for the person who is fed up of himself and his own evils. one which apprehends mind, overcomes bane and calamities, annihilates ignorance, bestows deliverance, Supreme benefactor, truth awareness and bliss giver mother of Sai, direct form of Sai, diadem of all scriptures, glory to shree Sai satcharitra divine book",
    "Description": "✨Adhyay 3 (Ovi 109-140, 148).✨\nAdhyay 3- The Gateway to Shri Sai Satcharitra, mentions a Leela which describes how Sai Baba stood in defence of the Rohila, despite complaints from the villagers who were disturbed by his loud recitation of Quranic verses at night. Baba not only ignored their objections but also said something even more intriguing—that the Rohila's wife was not of good character, and that she would secretly try to approach Baba, but whenever the Rohila began his recitations, she would grow fearful and retreat. This raises a deeper question: Why did Baba defend the Rohila so strongly, and what deeper truth was he pointing toward through this mysterious statement? \nIn this video Shri Krishnaji unfolds the deeper spiritual aspect of the Leela and answers various questions related to it:\n✨Who is the Rohila's wife, and what did Baba truly mean when He said she was troubling Him?\n✨What are the two greatest weaknesses of human beings, and how can one overcome them?\n✨Why do people commit sins?\n✨Why is it that out of thousands, only a few reach their ultimate destination and realize God in His true form?\n\nThrough this story, Baba shows us how divine remembrance is the key to master our lower tendencies.\n“Remembrance of God is to the heart as water is to a fish; see what happens to a fish when it is taken out of water.”\nWatch this video to explore the spiritual depth behind this Leela and understand Baba’s timeless wisdom in guiding souls beyond the snares of desire.\n🙏🏻Om Sai Ram🙏🏻\n-----------------\n0:00 Introduction\n0:51 Rohila's story\n6:28 Rohila's wife and Antaryami Baba\n10:54 Why do humans sin?\n12:28 Baba or Maya\n16:07 Gateway to Sai Satcharitra and 2 great weaknesses\n17:52 Inhin Logo Ne Le Lina Dupatta Mera: Song\n26:30 Kabir Ji's Doha: Kanak and Kamini\n28:21 Essence of the Leela\n-----------------\n\n✨अध्याय 3 (ओवी 109-140, 148)✨\nअध्याय 3 – श्री साईं सच्चरित्र का प्रवेश द्वार में एक लीला का वर्णन है, जिसमें बताया गया है कि कैसे साईं बाबा ने रोहिला का पक्ष लिया, जबकि गाँव वाले उसके रात में ज़ोर से कुरान की आयतें पढ़ने की शिकायत कर रहे थे। बाबा ने न केवल उनकी शिकायतों की उपेक्षा की, बल्कि उससे भी अधिक रहस्यमयी बात कही — कि रोहिला की पत्नी कोई अच्छी स्त्री नहीं है, वह छिपकर बाबा के पास आने की कोशिश करती है, लेकिन जब रोहिला कुरान का पाठ आरंभ करता है, तो वह डरकर वापस लौट जाती है।\nयह लीला एक गहन प्रश्न को जन्म देती है: आख़िर बाबा ने रोहिला का इतनी दृढ़ता से पक्ष क्यों लिया? और बाबा अपने इस रहस्यपूर्ण कथन के माध्यम से कौन-सी गहरी आध्यात्मिक सच्चाई उजागर कर रहे थे?\nइस वीडियो में श्री कृष्णाजी इस लीला के गहरे आध्यात्मिक पक्ष को उजागर करते हैं और इससे जुड़े कई महत्वपूर्ण प्रश्नों के उत्तर देते हैं:\n✨रोहिला की पत्नी वास्तव में कौन है, और जब बाबा कहते हैं कि वह उन्हें तंग करती है, तो उसका क्या गूढ़ अर्थ है?\n✨मनुष्य की दो सबसे बड़ी कमजोरियाँ कौन-सी हैं, और उनसे कैसे मुक्ति पाई जा सकती है?\n✨लोग पाप क्यों करते हैं?\n✨हज़ारों में से केवल कुछ ही लोग अपने परम लक्ष्य तक पहुँचकर ईश्वर को उनके वास्तविक स्वरूप में क्यों जान पाते हैं?\n\nइस कथा के माध्यम से बाबा यह दर्शाते हैं कि ईश्वर का स्मरण ही वह कुंजी है जिससे हम अपनी नीच प्रवृत्तियों पर विजय प्राप्त कर सकते हैं।\n“बस यही है साई की बंदगी, भूलू तो मौत स्मरु तो जिंदगी। “\nइस वीडियो को देखें और इस गूढ़ लीला के आध्यात्मिक गहराई में उतरें, तथा जानें कि कैसे साईं बाबा अपनी अमूल्य वाणी और कृपा से जीवों को काम-वासना जैसी ग्रंथियों से मुक्त कर मोक्ष की ओर ले जाते हैं।\n🙏🏻ॐ साई राम🙏🏻\n\n#saileelarahasya  #saibaba  #miraclesofsaibaba  #spiritualstories  #saileela  #spiritualism #krishnaji #divineremembrance  #kaamvasana #overcomingdesire #spiritualwisdom  #gurukripa  #krishnajionrohila #saisatcharitraleelas #jaisai #shirdisai #saiamritvachan #saiamritvani #corespirituality #trending #explore #saidarshan\n\n\nReference:\nInhin Logon Ne Lina Dupatta Mera - \n   • Inhin Logon Ne Lina Dupatta Mera | Pakeeza...   …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "12,459 views",
    "Likes": "648"
  },
  {
    "Title": "ये है सच्ची परिक्रमा( स्थूल से सूक्ष्म तक ) - शिर्डी वार्षिक परिक्रमा 2024",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=to4RL16sqqE",
    "Transcript": "om sai ram millions of obeisance at the feet of all sai devotees as we all know that on February 13th in shirdi, shirdi circumambulation is organized this initiative has been implemented for last four years by shirdi sansthan and the people of shirdi many devotees participate in it and avail the fortune of it before I speak on circumambulation I will exposit some verses from sai sathcharitra which will help us to enter into the subject chapter four verse from 58 to 61 in which hemadpant says blessed are those stones and the grass in shirdi which without effort kissed baba's feet every day and held the sacred dust from his feet on their head and further he says shirdi is our pandharpur, shirdi is our jagannath Puri, dwarka, shirdi alone is our gaya, Kashi-vishwanath and even our rameshwar is in shirdi shirdi alone is our badrikedar, our nashik trimbakeshwar, ujjain, mahakaleshwar and also mahabaleshwar gokarna sai's sacred company in shirdi is our agam (scriptures) and nigam (Dharmashastra) that itself is the assuagement of the suffering and the pain of the worldly life and the easiest way to deliverance so Baba is defining shirdi's glory in a way that all the purest pilgrims of the world realms in shirdi through the voice of hemadpant if this is the authority of Shirdi the Holy Land and the atmosphere where Baba breathed for around 60 years he purified that earth with his life, his qualities, his action and with the depth of life so that holy land is circumambulated this 13 February therefore I request all the sai devotees to come to share in large numbers and be the proprietor of fate by being a part of it the land on which Baba incarnated, performed divine practices and gave light about life that land is going to be circumnavigated so how extraordinary would be its importance to sai devotees just if we keep the feeling of what it is said in this verses, if we keep silence remembering baba's name with devotion then we will be worthy of his grace so this is physical circumnavigation but any sadhna whether it is parikrama(circumnavigation) or padyatra(journey by foot) or upasana(worship) it starts in a gross physical form and ends in subtle realms or astral realm so this is physical parikrama is discussed in the heart of every sai devotee today and such events must be organized but unless we understand intrinsic meaning of parikrama we won't be able to imbibe its real meaning into our souls so I want to shower some light on its deeper meaning today such sadhanas of circumnavigation is prevalent like narmada parikrama, govardhan parikrama, girnar parikrama and vrindavan parikrama which are practiced with faith by devotees and it won't be beneficial to us if we don't understand its true meaning orbiting the holy place, temple, tomb or river around is the superficial circumambulation (parikrama). This is physical way. But there is subtle way too and if we don't understand it then we would be deprived from its real meaning . it's subtle meaning is that whatever duty I do in my life whatever it may be family, socially or self oriented whatever are the limitations or duty I should fulfill them completely I should take care of my children give them best education and make them a great citizen and present them to the world but carrying out these duties if I allow the sai to be seated in my mind, contemplate on him then that is real circumnavigation(parikrama) that is I execute each and every duty of my life but with Baba ceaselessly in my mind I won't forget sai even for a moment so the day when my consciousness would reach to such state that is real 'parikrama' I shall perform my responsibilities towards my family, society and country but while doing so sai should be enthroned in my mind he should not be evicted from my mind even for a moment when my consciousness reach to this stage then in a sense I am doing subtle parikrama around sai because Baba in 10th chapter of charitra says offering up to sai all the material objects of worldly life hence surrender your being at the feet of sai he will then bless you this is an easy way to get his blessings Here he clearly says deploy this body in fulfilling the responsibilities of worldly life.To run away from the world is not Paramarth( search for highest truth) surrender your being at the feet of sai he will then bless you this is an easy way to get his blessings marathi devotional song which says be your form in my mind and your name on my mouth, body is slave of tangibles, let the work be done cheerfully and let the duties be done with these hands ceaselessly but mind should be engrossed at your feet baba so this is sukshma parikrama unless the physical bodily circumnavigation is destined to this subtle circumnavigation then it would be considered complete now, a question may arise whether fulfilling every work and duty of world is it easy to stay in continuous contemplation of Baba I would like to answer it by giving an example so to keep the discussion as to you if it is possible or not suppose a boy or girl in his or her juvenility falls in love of opposite gender in such a way that he or she is unable to forget the love even for a moment he or she does all household chores, listen to elders very lovingly as encapsulated by love itself, but remains absorbed in the love of his or her so if this is possible then same love for sai is also possible but you need practice and renunciation as per the gita says Once Practice and Renunciation becomes one traits then is possible to seize baba in our minds as a lover do. so the day when our consciousness reaches to the level of singular devotion then in true sense we are doing subtle circumnavigation every journey starts physically ends exquisitely and I will end this one on one more ovi of Baba from charitra chapter 3rd verse 185 a miser wherever he may happen to be has before his minds eye day and night his buried treasure in the same way may sai be present in our hearts parikrama means I would orbit around and my center of attraction must be my Baba so this is real parikrama wherever I go my mind should focus on my Baba I would engage myself in doing all the responsibilities of worldly life but my mind should be engrossed in baba with the desire that the parikrama organised on 13th that baba would take us from physical parikrama to subtle one with thi prayer I give rest to my voice jai sai ram one which apprehends mind, overcomes bane and calamities, annihilates ignorance, bestows deliverance, supreme benefactor, truth awareness and bliss giver mother of Sai, direct form of Sai, diadem of all scriptures, glory to shree Sai satcharitra divine book",
    "Description": "ये है सच्ची परिक्रमा( स्थूल से सूक्ष्म तक ) - शिर्डी  वार्षिक परिक्रमा 2024 …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "5,307 views",
    "Likes": "418"
  },
  {
    "Title": "श्रध्दा सबूरी ( संसार के सभी धर्मों का सार )",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fXXog-08G2o",
    "Transcript": "Without going through Patience (Saburi) Original Faith (Shraddha) cannot come in your life. If Baba has done something as per our wish and because of that we are doing Baba, Baba…and on that basis I am doing all the four aartis. I do pujas, I am offering food, I am doing this and that, whatever you are doing if behind that there is Duplicate Faith (Shraddha) then your actual journey has not even begun. Today’s topic is Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi). It is a very important topic because in this world there will be no such temple where these two words have not been written. Baba has what we say Spiritual treasure, he has put in these two words. Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi). These two words Baba has selected in such a way that it applies to every religion be it Christianity, Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi) are required. It may be Islam Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi) are required. It may be Sikhism, Jainism, whatever ‘ism’ it may be. It could be any religion in the world, without these two words no religion can breathe. In reality Baba has not given these two words Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi) to Hindu religion only. In fact, it is the life of all the religions of the world. It is the energy of all the religions. The spirituality of all the religions breathes because of these two words. If you remove these two words then there remains no religion. If you remove these two words from all the religions of the world, Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi), then no religion will thrive, will not survive. They will no longer exist. They are these two words. Today we will deeply decipher the importance of these two words, what Baba wanted to convey through these two words to the entire world and not only to the Hindus. What was he trying to tell all the religions of the world. One is Master of all is One (Sabka Malik Ek hai), this basic mantra of Baba is for the entire world Baba’s mantra Master of all is One (Sabka Malik Ek hai) is for the entire world, for all the religions similarly these words Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi) are the second basic mantra for all the religions. Firstly, we will talk about normal faith (Shraddha). What is normal faith (Shraddha)? It means having faith in God. How is faith in God? In a normal person’s life, towards Baba or any god or goddesses, if faith develops then how does it develop? That God, Goddess, Sadguru if they are in our life, as per our wish, if they fulfill our wish, , If Baba has performed some miracle in our life, if he has taken us out of some problem, if our wish has been fulfilled then we develop faith towards Baba. Then we start saying Baba, Baba… and we think that to be our faith. Earlier I did not have much faith on Baba but today If I am doing Baba, Baba… I sing Baba’s hymns, kirtans, attend all the venerations and so I am Baba’s devotee. We give ourselves a certificate that I am Sai’s devotee. Do you know that this faith which is born because of fulfillment of wish, because you have come out of your troubles it has arisen, is it original shraddha? If some day Baba does not fulfill your wish, if he does not give any solution to your problem, if because of your wishes you do Baba, Baba, if tomorrow your wishes are not fulfilled then the intoxication of the devotion also will go away. Isn’t it simple? If that trust, if that faith, that devotion is rising from fulfillment of wishes then it is obvious that if Baba does not fulfill your wishes, if Baba does not pull you out of your troubles, then your faith will tremble. This happens with 99.99% people. That is why I say that this is duplicate faith. This is not original faith. This is fake faith. How can you say that? I do all the 4 aartis. I go to Shirdi 10 times a year. I read Sai Satcharitra. I do Bhajans, I do kirtans and you say I have no faith? This is not fair Krishnaji. This is crime Krishnaji. No this is not faith. Going ahead I say that this is false faith. This is because this faith is borrowed. Baba has given this faith in alms. because He has fulfilled our wishes, He has taken us out from our troubles, He has taken us out of our problems that is why I have faith. If the reason of my faith are these three reasons, then that is duplicate faith. It is not original faith. First let us clarify this, what is duplicate faith and what is original faith. After my saying this ask yourself this question whether your faith is duplicate or original. You need not ask this to anyone. Your inner self will give you the answer. It may say yes that my faith is duplicate or those who actually love Baba may there be storm or cyclone or there may be series of problems, there may be years of struggles with troubles, even if faith in Baba does not reduce but keeps on increasing day by day that is true faith. If you see Adhyay 19 of Sai Satcharitra where there is description of Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi), Baba has very nicely said while describing Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi) has explained Patience (Saburi) first and then he comes to Faith (Shraddha). If you see the original Sai Satcharitra, I am not talking about Hindi one because the Hindi one is not even 40%, there are only leelas. The Vedantic things and the depth of the Shastras they have not included it in the Hindi Sai Satcharitra which is small. I am speaking about the original Marathi book. In this Adhyay 19 Baba first speaks about Patience (Saburi) and then comes to Faith (Shraddha). Why is it so? Because Baba knows that original Faith (Shraddha) takes birth from the womb of Patience (Saburi). Original faith after passing through Patience (Saburi) it takes birth within a person and that is original Faith (Shraddha) Patience is of two types. If I ask a question to the people sitting here what is the meaning of Patience (Saburi) then 99.99% will reply that whatever maybe the troubles our Faith (Shraddha) should not be shaken that is Patience (Saburi). They will give this answer. But there is one more thing higher than this. In problems, troubles, dilemma, issues that Faith which sustains, that Patience which you are able to sustain that is the original Patience (Saburi). But this Patience (Saburi) is not tested only in troubles and sorrows but when there is prosperity in life, when you are comfortable in every aspect of life, there are no health issues or mental troubles or financial troubles you are fulfilled in every aspect, in such times your Patience (Saburi) is tested. Rather I would say that the test Baba conducts in troubles and sorrows is more tough than the ones he conducts in comfortable times. Because when the luxuries and comforts come into your life much more than required then it compels the person to be off the ground. Your feet are no longer on the ground. He tests Patience (Saburi) this way by giving luxuries and comforts to see if the person is now flying high, full of ego, full of pride. This is one of the ways of testing, there also Patience (Saburi) is tested. We feel that only in sorrow and troubles Patience (Saburi) is tested, no, but even in comforts and luxuries also Patience is tested. Whether this person is able to digest success, how he is able to digest name and fame, whether he will lift himself off the ground after getting so much happiness and success and that is the biggest test. . It is even higher than problems and troubles. If after getting so much comfort, happiness, abundance you remain grounded, if your feet are still on the ground, if you have no ego, if you have no pride, if you are not a victim of pride, if your politeness remains then understand that you have original Patience (Saburi) in your life. I will repeat the sentence again if there is any road to reach the original Faith (Shraddha) from Duplicate Faith (Shraddha) then that is Patience Baba throws so many stones and pebbles in our life and test the one who was doing Baba, Baba for past so many years, when things were good now let us increase the troubles in this person’s life and in spite of this will he be able to embrace the troubles. In spite of this will his devotion remain pure. I will take some verses from Sai Satcharitra in Adhyay 29 which confirms this. I will take this is Marathi because the Hindi one may not have these verses. In Adhyay 29 Verses 125, 126, 127 I will read this in Marathi first and then I will translate it. Verse 125 – Chalu jata kathilya vatey, Arambhi Arambhi Goad Vate, Pude aise pasartil sarate, kathech kathe chohikade. What does this verse mean? When Baba shows the spiritual path, when we start walking the path, when our journey begins. When we start the journey, in the beginning we feel good, we feel nice and everything is going on perfectly, nothing is going wrong Chalu jata kathilya vatey, Arambhi Arambhi Goad Vate – so everything feels good initially. Pude aise pasartil sarate, kathech kathe chohikade – later on Baba weaves a net of thorns, then on all sides only thorns are seen, only stones are seen, then there remain no comforts in life and this Baba says himself, Sai Satcharitra means Baba. I have proved this many times. Aise pasartil sarate, kathech kathe chohikade – means wherever you see, you see only thorns. Verse 126 Mag tya nisthes phutatil phate, Sahaj mani sanshey date, Kimarth Sai ya Advate, Ani he vate manala. That faith that was there, that duplicate faith that was there because of some favor done by Baba, Baba obliged me in life due to which my faith deepened, that faith starts shaking and there are many outlets now. It does not remain steady it breaks out into many outlets, it starts shaking. Mag tya nisthes phutatil phate, Sahaj mani sanshey date – and then there is a doubt created in the mind that where is Baba taking me on this wrong path. Has Baba changed? Is he the same Baba whom I have been worshiping for years? Is it the same Baba? Sahaj mani sanshey date – and he further says Kimarth Sai ya Advate, Ani he vate manala – and then the mind feels where is Baba taking me on the wrong road. The meaning is simple. It means that when troubles in life increases Faith (Shraddha) starts shaking. Then further Baba gives answer to this also. When the state of mind is such what should one do? Whenever mind is suspicious and think where is Baba taking me on the wrong path, when such suspicion comes to mind, he says Pari he aise jethe vate, tetech Shraddha dhara nete – and he says at that time hold on to faith tightly. He further says Kasotich he pratyash sankate, tenech paithe drudh shraddha – and the thorns that I have spread they are test and by passing through these tests you will be able to reach original Faith (Shraddha). Further ahead he says in a verse that I was the one who laid the thorns of these troubles, it was not anyone else. Om Sai Ram. The evidence that these thorns are laid by Sai himself is given in the 129th verse of same 29th chapter. this is the objective of these thorns(difficulties), they too are laid by Sai himself only then true remembrance of Sai takes place and all difficulties are overcome And I laid these troubles so that your duplicate shraddha converts to original. These three verses you read carefully and you will understand that the original Faith (Shraddha) takes birth from the womb of Patience (Saburi). Without going through Patience (Saburi) Original Faith (Shraddha) cannot come in your life. If Baba has done something as per our wish and because of that we are doing Baba, Baba…and on that basis I am doing all the three aartis. I do pujas, I am offering food, I am doing this and that, whatever you are doing if behind that there is Duplicate Faith (Shraddha) then your actual journey has not even begun. I say bitter words and I am infamous for the same and not many can be with me. But those who are honest, even if he is sitting in Nigeria jungle, he may not be even knowing Baba, Baba will also bring him to his court and make him sit down but he only has to be honest. In Reality when prosperity comes in life, there is abundance, everything is fine in such times if you are able to sustain Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi) only then in your sorrow and pain will you be able to sustain Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi). The seed of that is in prosperity, if you did not pay any attention in comfort and convenience, that this is a phase and this is also not the truth, if this has come then this too will go so don’t give much importance to this. If you do not let it go to your head, you did not pay heed to it, if you do not become egoistic, it means that you endured it, if your legs are firmly on the ground then you have endured that phase and if you have endured that phase then you will also endure pain and sorrow phase. So, the seed of phase of sorrow and pain is hidden in comforts and luxuries. If the door is closed, if there is no hope of any air coming from outside then in that closed door you can keep the lamp lit nicely without it going out. This is duplicate Faith (Shraddha). But if in the stormy waters your lamp remains lit that is original Shraddha. But for that original Faith (Shraddha) you should have the strength to endure in stormy winds. You must have the strength to sustain that Faith in that time. In closed room you have kept your lamp lit then it is nothing great. If in the stormy seas your lamp remains lit then you have understood original Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi). If there is any song which defines Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi) well and touches the heart is this song-Tere phulon se bhi Pyar tere katon se bhi pyar. See the depth of the words of the song. Chahe sukh de ya dukh, chahe kushi de ya gum, Malik jaise bhi rakhega vaise reha lenge hum. Chahe Khushi barah sansar, ya de asuon ki dhar, jo bhi dena chahe dede kardar, duniya ke palan har, Tere phulon se bhi Pyar tere katon se bhi pyar. Humko dono hai pasand, teri dhup aur chaon, datta kisibhi disha me le chal zindagi ki nav, chahe hame lagade par ya dubo de hame mazdar, jo bhi dena chahe dede kartar, Tere phulon se bhi Pyar tere katon se bhi pyar. This is Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi). How unconditional it is. She says chahe hame lagade par chahe dubo de hame mazdar. After this line which motivational speaker will be able to speak on motivation, after listening to this line. You tell me. chahe hame lagade par chahe dubo de hame mazdar means do whatever you want to because you are the doer your world runs as per your order and I will not come in between that. I will not keep do and don’t in front of you. I have sincerely been devoted to you and for that I will never say save me. If it is your wish that I drown then drown me, I am ready to drown. God keep me alive in such a way to know that you are drowning me and that is enough. I don’t say that you save me. I say that if you wish to drown me then drown me you have crores of rights to drown me but I have one request, keep me alive in such a way that I know that I am drowning with your holy hands. Which motivation will sustain in front of this, which positive thinking will sustain. That is why it is said that where motivation ends, where positive thinking ends, where affirmations die, from there spirituality begins. From there original spirituality begins. I hope now I have clarified what is the difference between original Faith (Shraddha) and duplicate Faith (Shraddha). How to move from duplicate Faith (Shraddha) to original Faith (Shraddha). If I have to give a burning example about this then I will put forward Ramji in a different form. Assume that Ramji himself stands in front of you. And I always take this example. Ramji actually stands in front of you and you ask him a question. Hey Ramji when I see your life, from your childhood till your last breath, you have not seen anything else other than struggle. You have not seen anything other than troubles and problems; and the height of this is that there was no possibility that these troubles should come to you. You are on the path of righteousness, seeing your character, humanity follows righteousness, you are that personality. And in your life, there has been nothing other than sorrows and troubles. What did you achieve by doing this. By walking on the path of righteousness what benefit did you get. What did you achieve? Think that Ramji is standing in front of me and I asked him this question. Do you know what Ramji’s answer is? You can call it positive thinking or whatever you wish to say but actually he will only say that I love righteousness so much that I simply held on to it and I never realized whether I was in comfort or sorrow. I loved righteousness so much that I held on to it and kept on walking. This will be the answer by Lord Rama. If you have developed deep interest in righteousness then both happiness and sadness will have no value because you are in love with righteousness, you are in love with principles, you are in love with honesty and faith. Now sadness and happiness cannot perturb me. I enjoy living beyond happiness and sadness which is righteousness. When I hold on to it then I see neither happiness nor sorrow. Both these things do not matter to me. Ramji will give this reply. In our life also that righteousness is Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi). If that Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi) is there in our life then neither joy nor sorrow will disturb us. We will go beyond this duality we will transcend duality. If you ask Ramji then this will be the answer. I will take a Leela from Sai Satcharitra which will clarify Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi) further. This story is from Adhyay 23 of Kaka Saheb Dixit. This story says that Baba wanted to test Kaka Saheb because when Kaka Saheb Dixit was with Baba, first time when Nana Saheb Chandorker tells Kaka Saheb Dixit about Baba and says that you are now handicapped, my Guru is so powerful that if you take his Darshan once then this handicap of yours will be no more and I am confident about that. This is what Nana Saheb Chandorker says to Kaka Saheb Dixit. In turn see what Kaka Saheb Dixit answers. Kaka Saheb Dixit is such a person, he says that if your Guru can really heal a handicapped person then tell your Guru that the handicap of my leg does not disturb me, the disability of my mind troubles. If your Guru is truly capable then tell him to remove the disability of my mind. This is Kaka Saheb Dixit. That Kaka Saheb Dixit is such a person of integrity, this Kaka Saheb Dixit is now being tested. Baba at first tells Shama that today I want to slaughter a goat go and get a knife. He goes to Radhakrishna Mai and tells her that Baba has asked for a knife. Since Baba ordered it, she gives it immediately but when she comes to know that to slaughter a goat, he has called for the knife she rans and takes the knife back. These two failed, even Shama, Madhavrao Deshpande also fails here. See here Radhakrishna Mai creates a dilemma in the mind of Madhavrao Deshpande by taking the knife back. If you are asking for a knife for this work, will you give it. This person had gone with a very innocent mind who know maybe like Kaka Saheb Dixit he would have innocently agreed. But as soon as Radhakrishna Mai takes the knife back from him even Madhavrao Deshpandes’s integrity was shaken. He thinks that if I go again in front of Baba then he will send me again so he hides himself. This is what the story says. Then it is Bade Baba’s turn. He is a Muslim fakir; it is a very common thing to slaughter. Baba tells Bade Baba you go and get the knife and slaughter. Bade Baba ask why cut it? See the wording. He has stayed with Baba for years. What is his reply why to cut it? Baba says okay and Baba then leaves him also. Now comes the turn of Kaka Saheb Dixit. Born in a Brahmin family, non-violence is his religion, in his life he has never eaten flesh and meat or drunk any liquor. He is a very conscientious Brahmin, Kaka Saheb Dixit, and he has been asked to go and get a knife. Kaka Saheb Dixit goes and gets a knife and stands in front of Baba. Baba says what are you waiting for strike, , slaughter it. As soon as he receives the permission, he closes his eyes and he was about to strike with the knife, Baba ask him to stop when Baba feels that he is going to strike. At the last moment he stops him. And he gives that goat to someone else and ask him to take it to Takya and the goat dies on the way. This means he chose such a goat who was about to die anytime soon. He got such a goat so even if take time to say stop then if such a goat is cut whose time to die is near… Baba takes so much precaution. Please understand this Leela carefully. There is no one in this world who is more for non-violence than Baba. He selected a goat in such a way that Baba knew that in a few moments it is going to die and I also have to test Kaka Saheb Dixit. If I take time to say stop and in the mean time the knife cuts the goat even then it would not matter because it was time for it to die. He chose so very minutely. So much precaution has to be taken before doing the Leela this Adhyay tells us that. The Goat was about to die, it was near its death and it died. When Baba is asking Kaka Saheb Dixit that did you not feel ashamed to kill a dumb animal. Kaka Saheb’s reply is in Adhyay 23 Verse 173 – Hou sukhi athva kasti, parinamavar nahi drushti, Ghadel asel jaise adrushti, parameshtila kalji. He says after following your orders it may happen that I may be in bliss or I maybe in extreme sorrow but my attention is not on the effect Baba, my attention is only on your orders, listening to your order is my religion is what I believe. In front of your orders there is no place for my logic and argument. This the first answer and the second answer is – Chitta Gurupadi savadhan – the mind is fully devoted to and at Guru’s feet. Rahot ki jaot pran – whether my life is there or not I am not worried. Amha Guruchich agya praman, Parinam nirvana to jane – I have total trust on guru’s order and you know better what is good or bad for me. If for doing this if you give heaven then it is worth while and for doing this even if you give me hell saying yes, I told and you did this bad deed now you will go to hell then I am ready for that also. But I will obey your orders. Understand this carefully. When he is ready to perform that act Kaka Saheb Dixit has that much clarity that this could be a heinous crime but for this heinous crime even if I have to go to hell then I accept it because it has your consent. This has a deep meaning. This is not an ordinary Leela. In more Verse 181 he says – Amhi aplya agnyache daas – I am a servant of your orders. Yogyayogya na anu manas – I will not see what is right and what is wrong. Veli vechu jivitas – if required will give up own life also. Guru Vachanas pratipalu – but will not disobey your orders. He picks up the weapon with so much clarity. This is original Faith (Shraddha) and original Patience (Saburi). In this era getting a Samarth Sadguru like Baba is impossible and to get a good disciple like Kaka Saheb Dixit also is like almost impossible. You may feel bad but it is impossible. The era in which we live is very dangerous. There are more duplicate people. There is such a dearth of original people. The original people cannot even sustain. This world is very weird. There is no Samarth Sadguru like Baba present in this world nor there is a good disciple like Kaka Saheb Dixit present in the world. He is said to be the best disciple. To be a disciple of Baba is a very tough thing so when will we become disciple. It feels that it is impossible to become a disciple in this era. Our selfishness does not die then how will we become disciple. Our selfish devotion does not die then how will we become disciple. Since we are talking about Goat (Bakri) I would like to tell you about Bakri Id also. Why I am taking this up you will understand it later. Don’t think why this Bakri Id has come up suddenly. Why I am taking this up, the concept will become clear. In Islam Bakri Id which is celebrated every year and crores of goats are slaughtered on that day unnecessarily, I will tell you the secret behind it. What is the deep meaning of Bakri Id. Why is Bakri Id celebrated? There was a Saint by the name of Ibrahim and he had forgotten himself in the worship of God. One day just as Kaka Saheb Dixit was tested similarly God felt that this person needs to be tested. One day God visits him in the dream and says today I want a sacrifice. So, he gets up early morning, in those times where Ibrahim used to stay, in that area Camels used to be killed and the flesh was eaten. So, he thought that Allah wants that he should slaughter the Camel. Give the sacrifice in the name of Allah. So next day he goes to the market to get a Camel. But at night again Allah visits him in dream and says Ibrahim did I tell you to get Camel for slaughtering. Then he asked what should I slaughter? God Says that I want sacrifice of your only child. See how big the test is. In this world the biggest center of attachment is our child. If required we will give up on our life but it is every parent’s wish that the child lives long. And a father is been told that your only child who is 8 years old should be sacrificed in my name. This is the sacrifice. For some time, he is disturbed but then he says the path on which I am, the path of faith that I have chosen I have to listen to this. I have to give this sacrifice. He wakes up his wife at night and prepares his wife and child and he is continuously taking Lord’s name. The child is made to wear new dress, fragrance is applied after bath and he is taken to the place where the sacrifice is to be made. When he looks at the child, he has tears in his eyes and turning the face towards the Lord he says a prayer and say Lord there is a request. I will give the sacrifice but can I blindfold my eyes. Lord says okay do it there is no problem in that. Sacrifice is important whether you do it with open or closed eyes what does it matter. He closes his eyes and the child’s head is kept. He looks towards the Lord who says kill him, so he raises his weapon and hits. The body separates from the head. After this he keeps his weapon and unties the blindfold, he sees that it is not his child’s head which is cut but a goat has his body separated from the head. It means at the last moment Lords shifts place instead of child he puts the goat. So, what this Leela says. First, he saw Ibrahim’s faith, can he sacrifice anything in this world. Can he sacrifice that which is very close to him, that which he loves too much. Lord wanted to test this so he tested and Ibrahim passed with 100% marks. But see the Lord’s compassion and that is why he is called Rahim, Rehman, Karim. At the end moment he did not let his son die and he put a goat in its place and the goat was slaughtered. And today Islam with feeling that Allah loves sacrifice, this feeling of sacrifice should endlessly live in our life we will celebrate Bakri Id every year. Understand the story well. First of all is it right that every year we should slaughter crores of goats. What was Allah’s message. Now I will ask you a question whom has Ibrahim slaughtered, his child or goat? First give me the answer. Whom has Ibrahim slaughtered, The child because in his heart he has the feeling that I am cutting my child, then who killed the goat? Allah is it confirmed? Because it was Allah who shifted it. At the last moment taking the child away from there and putting the goat there who had the ability to do so. The Lord had. That means who killed the goat. Lord slaughtered it. If Lord slaughters a goat, then he has full authority to do so because if he created the whole world, he has that right to destroy it also. But who gave this right to humans to slaughter a goat? If Islam understand the depth of this that the goat which was killed it was killed by Allah and not even Ibrahim. If Allah has killed then how can we humans kill the goat? From this episode we have only this to learn that if required then I will sacrifice the most valued thing of life in the name of God. If we understand this learning and live accordingly then there is no need to sacrifice crores of goats every year. Here Baba also did not allow the goat to be slaughtered and there also Allah did not allow the child to be cut. That is why he is compassionate, merciful may it be Saibaba or God of Islam, he is a priest of mercy. He cannot see anyone been slaughtered. He had used the knife to cut the child and not the goat. If you have that much guts then all of you become Ibrahim and kill your children and show. Then I will respect you. But why are you slaughtering an innocent goat. What harm has that goat done to you? There is no clarity. What Allah does how can we do? That goat was slaughtered by Allah and Allah has all the right to do so because this world is created by him but how can we humans kill the goat but the story is similar to Islam’s Bakri Id so I took this up also. This whole topic of depth of Faith (Shraddha) and Patience (Saburi) I hope that you have understood what is original Faith (Shraddha) what is Patience (Saburi) what is duplicate Faith. And how a person’s journey is from duplicate faith (Shradhha) to original Faith (Shraddha). I have tried my best and may have touched your heart. Essence of this leela, through this leela Baba is saying that this world is forever thriving through the struggle between selfishness and selflessness, day and world, sustenance and light this impossible problem can only be solved by knowing the depth of faith and perseverance I cannot fulfill your legitimate and illegitimate demands. This is not been done by any God nor will any do. Every miracle and leela of mine of course starts with selfishness and never forget that it ends to selflessness till when will you be trapped in the attraction towards my leelas and miracles? rather when are you going to go beyond and listen my heart's wish if i am asking Saburi from you as a second coin then its only meaning is that you need face difficulties and problems this is a bitter truth on this truth Kabir ji says in the end my heart says that shraddha and saburi are the two nostrils of universe with which entire worlds Adhayatm, ruhaniyaat and spirituality breathes may it be any country or religion it is dormant without the life of shradhha and saburi Incomplete is the righteousness and fidelity if world lack shradhha(faith) and saburi(patience) one which apprehends mind, overcomes bane and calamities, annihilates ignorance, supreme benefactor, truth awareness and bliss giver Mother of Sai, direct form of Sai, diadem of all scriptures, glory to shree Sai satcharitra divine book",
    "Description": "श्रध्दा सबूरी ( संसार के सभी धर्मों का सार )\n\n\n\n#sai #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #like #comment #share#explore #fyp #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #values #youtube#zili#shraddha#saburi #newgeneration#peace #saisatcharitra#young #corespirituality #saileelarahasya#viral …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "26,446 views",
    "Likes": "1,111"
  },
  {
    "Title": "शेजारती - ओवाळू आरती माझ्या ... (भावार्थ)",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YbHROuafDMk",
    "Transcript": "Because what is this Aarti saying? 'paacha hi tattvancha deep lavila ata' If we are talking about elements then we will have to understand the philosophy of elements. That is why this Aarti is of very high range. Tukaram Maharaj composed it 500 to 550 years ago, but he did it with a lot of thought. Differentiating that enlightenment is different and philosophy of elements is different. Now see what is the meaning of Shejarati, if I ask here then everyone will say that what we go to the Samadhi temple every night at 10:00 pm is Shejarati, this is the answer you people will give. Exactly what is called ShejAarti? What is the meaning of Aarti? Aarti comes from Rati (passion). Rati or passion can be towards a person, it can be towards the world, it can be towards things, it can be towards clothes, My adornment and decoration could be a delight to be my beloved it can be towards anything, but when the same Rati is love towards Sadhguru or God then it is called Aarti So this is the meaning of Aarti and Shej Aarti means where as soon as the night comes, it becomes festival and celebration for that person he connects his master in the silence of the night as Kabir ji's couplet perhaps describes it very well. Listen carefully to this couplet. 'Nainan andar aoo toh' imbibe into my eyes 'nainan andar aoo toh nain jhaap tohe lu' So the lover is saying, you just settle in my eyes once, I will close my eyes and absorb you inside me. Naina Antar Aaw Tu Nain Jhaapi Tohi Leu Na Mein Dekhu Aur ko Na Tohi Dekhan Deu This is Shej Aarti where the night becomes pleasant and the day does not pass quickly. The world disappears during the day, the attachment to the world is completely cut off and one waits for the night so that the entire night can be spent in memory, remembrance and tears while remembering the beloved. that is Shej Aarati The Arati at the beginning in Shej arati Ovalu arati mazya Sadgurunatha, mazya Sainatha, Panchahi tatvanca dipa lavila ata, Nirgunaci sthiti keisi akara ali, Baba akara ali, Sarva ghati bharuni urali Sai Mauli. Ovalu arati mazya Sadgurunatha, mazya Sainatha, Panchahi tatvanca dipa lavila ata, Raja tama sattva tighe maaya prasavali, Baba maaya prasavali, Mayeciye poti keisi maya udbhavali, Ovalu arati mazya Sadgurunatha, mazya Sainatha, Panchahi tatvanca dipa lavila ata, Saptasagari keisa khela mandila, Baba khela mandila, Kheluniya khela avagha vistara kela, Ovalu arati mazya Sadgurunatha, mazya Sainatha, Panchahi tatvanca dipa lavila ata, Brahmandici racana keisi dakhavili dola, Baba dakhavali dola, Tuka mhane maza Svami krpalu bhola. Ovalu arati mazya Sadgurunatha, mazya Sainatha, Panchahi tatvanca dipa lavila ata. Sri Sacchidananda Sadguru Sainatha Maharaja ki Jai!! We have been performing this Aarti for at least 500 years since Tukaram Maharaj was there. At least it is sung on the holy land of Maharashtra. But today we will try to understand it deeply. Its a request, as aarti is very deep a little bit might go over your head so please listen carefully because some things in it are talking about elemental knowledge (Tattvagyan). So enlightenment (Aatmagyan) is a different thing and elemental knowledge (Tattvagyan) is a different thing. Many people mix these two. Due to lack of clarity, self-knowledge is considered as Tatvgyan, Tatvgyan itself is considered as self-knowledge, but both are different. Only after attaining self-knowledge, if a person is of very high eligibility, he becomes entitled to Elemental knowledge and Sai Baba has been addressed as Tatvgyanavatar( An embodiment of Tattvagyan) in the 36th chapter of Sai Satcharitra. That is why he is a Perfect man. Hence He is Krishna, because he is the incarnation of Elemental knowledge, A verse comes in thirteenth chapter of Bhagavad Gita Kshetrakshetrajnavibhagayoga. Chapter 13 Verse 12. adhyātma-jñāna-nityatvaṁ tattva-jñānārtha-darśhanam etaj jñānam iti proktam ajñānaṁ yad ato ’nyathā So Krishna is saying that one who always rejoices in spiritual knowledge. And the one who is living only for the sake of vision Tatva Gyan or the one who is living only for the attainment of Tatva Gyan means it is cleared that both of them are different self-knowledge is different and Tattvagyan is what is to come after that. So all the wise men and saints reach self knowledge (Aatamagyan) with great difficulty. And Tatvgyan is a very distant matter, Tatvgyan is nothing but Lord Krishna himself, He is the complete incarnation, Because of not having the clarity of what Tattvgyan is. Tattvgyan and Self-knowledge both are possessed by saints is the notion That is why Kabir had to say that these two are different, the saint is different and the Satguru is different. That is why Kabir had to say, 'tirath gaye te ek faal, sant mile faal chaar' i.e an ordinary saint's who holds self knowledge not elemental knowledge company will four times fruitful than a pilgrimage, See, Kabir's words have come out of both experiences. He does not speak rehearsed or heard information He is a complete master of experiences. That's why Kabir ji says that if you go to a pilgrimage area, whether you go to Gangotri, Yamunotri, Badrinath, Kedarnath, whatever, 12 Jyotirlingas. Dwarka, Mathura, Vrindavan any number of pilgrim places you can take the names of take it 'Tirath gaye te ek phal sant mile phal char satguru mile anant phal kahat kabir vichar' This is Tattvgyan (elemental knowledge) and if like millions of people walk on the path of spirituality in search of it then of which five people might attain the enlightenment (self knowledge) with great difficulty only one in few becomes worthy of attaining elemental knowledge (Tattvgyan) attains that supreme liberation, he becomes possessor of Tattvgyan and about Baba it has been said in the 36th chapter of Sai Satcharitra that Baba is the incarnation of Tattvgyan Well, why am I saying this because what this Aarti is saying 'Panchahi tatvanca dipa lavila at,', if we are talking about Tattva, then now we will have to understand Tattvgyan. Therefore this aarti is of very high range. Tukaram Maharaj composed it 500-550 years ago, but he did it very thoughtfully. Differentiating that enlightenment(Aatamagyan) is different and philosophy of elements(Tattvgyan) is different. That is why in the eleventh chapter, Baba has shown the power over the five Elements over fire, over rain, as he was the possessor of the knowledge of elements, The enlightened ones will not be able to show it. Will never be able to. And secondly Baba is also telling us that hey dear if you consider me as your Sadguru, then you should reach the pedestal of Elemental knowledge, do not stop at self-knowledge. And I am saying this to you people. What I am saying is that it may take me a few years or a few births to reach that stage, but at least things should be clear at the conceptual level. When will we get it is a different matter? Definitely, as long as there is true competence within us, it would not emerge; we cannot attain that state. Even if it takes millions of births, it may not be achieved, but there should be clarity as to what the object is What is enlightenment? What is Tattvgyan? There should be clarity. But the whole world considers both of them to be the same. We are not able to differentiate that these two are different things. Now, if I come to each stanza, this Tattvgyan will be revealed even more, because this entire aarti is based on Tattvgyan only. 'Ovalu arati mazya Sadgurunatha', I perform your Arati O Sadguru Nath. My Sainath and I have combined the five elements within me – land, water, fire, air and sky – into one lamp. I am performing this Aarti for you by making a lamp of the five elements within me, so see how profound the words he is talking are ! that is, until you will not have the knowledge of these five elements as long as you are alive. Like the earth element inside us should merge into the water element and the water in which I have already mixed the earth element, that water element should merge into fire and that fire should merge into air and that air should merge into sky. In this way, if I continue to dedicate every element within me to a higher state than that, then the sky element will be saved and I will perform your Aarti by lighting the lamp of the sky element, in a way, I will become the lamp of the five elements. I will keep encircling you. Tukaram Maharaj is saying this. Got the point. Panchahi tatvanca dipa lavila ata Nirgunachi sthiti keisi akara ali, Baba akara ali, Sarva ghati bharuni urali Sai Mauli. And Baba, your real form is nirguna (formless) which is omnipresent You reside in every particle of the entire universe, yet in order for us to understand you from that exalted state, for the ignorant like us, for wretched like us you had to assume a small body whereas your form is so monstrous. It is so vast that it has no limits. So they are saying,'Nirgunaci sthiti keisi akara ali' Sarva ghati bharuni urali Sai Mauli. meaning despite being pervaded in every particle, being present in all the three worlds. Despite that, you took form for me so that I could understand you, I could grasp that depth. i could stare at your manifested form That's why you have come down to my level, wearing the robes of human form, tying cloth on forehead, wearing a kafni, and that to sitting in front of Dhuni (scared fire) getting scorched, so that I can see you. I can do devotion with form because it is not in my power to do devotion of formless I don't have that much power. Baba, I could not rise to your level, so you have descent down to my level Nirgunachi sthiti keisi akara ali, Baba akara ali, Sarva ghati bharuni urali Sai Mauli. So this was the first stanza and further it says Raja tama sattva tighe maya prasavali, Actually, what is your form? what is our form? Raja, Tama and Satva are our threefold nature, this is our nature, the entire world is made up of these three gunas i.e Sattva (goodness), Rajas (passion), and Tamas (ignorance). but the form of God is Sat (truth), Chit (consciousness) and Anand (bliss). So this is the difference. The attributes of us and this entire nature, this entire world, are made up of three things: Sattva Guna, Rajo Guna and Tamo Guna. But the manifestation of God, the form of God is Sat (truth), chit (consciousness) and anand (bliss) So Your real form is Satchidananda, but my form is Raja, Tama and Satva 'Raja tama sattva tighe maya prasavali' Firstly, Maya came down from your Satchidanand form. Only when she accepted the three gunas was she able to create the entire universe. Maya. And from the womb of Maya, you have taken a form only for my sake. So that you can remove that ignorance from within me and one day you can make me as great as you. That is why you took such a small form and remain sitting in front of my eyes in Dwarkamai in a village called Shirdi, so that with your support, I can one day reach that huge form by taking the support of your perception of the divine with attributes and a specific form. How deep is the thing that Tukaram Maharaj has put in these lines: \"Raja tama sattva tighe maya prasavali\" It means that Maya took hold of this tri-attributive consciousness and then created the entire universe. First of all, from the womb of Maya, the entire tri-attributive universe was created, from the womb of Maya and from the womb of the universe, You (Sadguru) are born and You appear before us in the sagunsakar form so that we can worship You and one day by understanding Your consciousness and traveling from the gross to the subtle, one day we too can become as prevailing as You are 'Saptasagari keisa khela mandila': This is a very important line, please listen carefully 'Saptasagari keisa khela mandila, Baba khela mandila, Kheluniya khela avagha vistara kela'. 'Sapt Sagari': Now many people feel that 'Sapt Sagar' means across seven seas, it sounds very childish. but what maharaj wants to say with this lines? 'Saptasagari keisa khela mandila'; now i try to present what Tukaram Maharaj has said about 'Sapt Sagari'. Please listen carefully. Now I will have to tell in the first place that, How was this entire universe created? First of all. The Supreme Brahma who exists in the attribute-less formless form and satchitanand form is the first one. That is what is called Sanatan. Okay, so the one who is eternal, who is PurnaBrahm, who is Satchitanand, that state has descended a little from there to Avyakt (unmanifest) first ocean is Parabrahma, the second ocean is Avyakt (unexpressed) meaning where there is nothing. now further down it descended from Avyakt to Mahatattva (fundamental principle or reality from which all other realities emerge) Mahatattva i.e. Hiranyagarbha means the womb of the entire universe. Just as Vyashti's (individual entity) womb is a woman's womb, it gives birth to a person. In the same way, samasthi (collective or the whole) is descended from Mahatattva hence called Hiranyagarbh So this third stage meaning first is Parabrahma below it Avyakt (unmanifest) from Avyakt to Mahatattva and from Mahatattva to an individual ego. Mahatattva is the collective ego and this individual ego is the ego of the soul, so it has descended to the fourth stage, meaning it is the fourth ocean. First, Parabrahma, then unmanifest, from the unmanifest to Mahatattva, from Mahatattva to ego, from ego are the Panchatanmatra (five subtle elements). From Panchatanmatra four-fold consciousness viz the mind, intellect, memory and ego are formed first not body So this Panchatanmatra is the fifth sea. Then Panchmahabhuta( five fundamental elements) were formed-the sixth sea And this entire universe was formed from the Panchmahabhuta which is the seventh ocean Saptasagari keisa khela mandila You alone were present As a Purnbramha and you descend down in so many forms you divided yourself in so many forms. Meaning all these forms are none but You. So, this is the depth. This is Advait (Non-Duality) Meaning every person sitting here, rather any creature, is fraction of that Purnabrahm which has descended to a lower level and divided itself into so many parts so many forms so many names. and therefore saying, 'Saptasagari keisa khela mandila, Baba khela mandila, Kheluniya khela avagha vistara kela.' So You have brought yourself down so much that You have been divided into so many forms. In reality, me feeling that I am separate from you is my foolishness. its my ignorance and this is the first Arati of Shejarati I am keeping the complete essence of 50th chapter. The entire 50th chapter is based on it. might have read the 50th chapter must be very boring felt Why is it kept unnecessarily? This pages just don't turn. What is Mahatattva? what is vyasti? what is samasti? what is omkar? what are these Panchatanmatra? It's a headache. But Sai Satcharitra is therefore Sai Satcharitra. There can be no match. So it cannot be compared with other texts. And further he says. 'Brahmandici racana keisi dakhavili dola, Baba dakhavali dola,' And he is saying that O Master because of understanding Your philosophy of elements, I can see the whole universe now. not from these eyes, but from the divine eyes of Tattvgyan that have given are now active and I am able to see the whole universe at a glance. Brahmandici rachana keisi dakhavili dola, Tuka mhane maza Swami krupalu bhola. and really he is so kind, he did not see my eligibility. He did not see my position. He showered his unwavering love and ascended me from individual knowledge to universal knowledge and instilled Tattvgyan in me Really, my Vitthal is very kind, my lord is very kind, with this aarti is over here. one which apprehends mind, overcomes bane and calamities, annihilates ignorance, bestows deliverance, supreme benefactor truth awareness and bliss giver mother of sai, direct form of sai, diadem of all scriptures, glory to shree sai satcharitra divine book",
    "Description": "Om Sai Ram 🙏🏻\nWe’ve all heard the Shej Aarti—Sai Baba’s final Aarti sung at night.\nBut have you ever wondered:\n👉 What do its words truly mean?\n👉 Why does Baba choose these verses to end the day?\n👉 What silent truths are hidden in its gentle rhythm?\nIn this rare and eye-opening satsang, Krishnaji decodes the Shej Aarti stanza by stanza, revealing the spiritual guidance, surrender, and deep inner silence woven into each line.\nThis isn’t just about understanding lyrics—it’s about uncovering Sai Baba’s final message to the soul before sleep.\nA message most miss, but every seeker needs.\n🔔 If you've chanted it… now is the time to truly understand it.\n\nॐ साई राम 🙏🏻\nहम सबने साईं बाबा की शेज आरती तो सुनी है —\nपर क्या कभी आपने सोचा है:\n👉 इन पंक्तियों का गूढ़ अर्थ क्या है?\n👉 बाबा दिन के अंत में यही आरती क्यों सुनते थे?\n👉 इन शांत सुरों में कौन से मौन संदेश छिपे हैं?\nइस विशेष सत्संग में कृष्णाजी शेज आरती की हर पंक्ति का अर्थ खोलते हैं,\nऔर बताते हैं कि ये आरती केवल सोने से पहले की प्रार्थना नहीं,\nबल्कि बाबा की आत्मा को जगाने वाली अंतिम शिक्षा है - त्याग, समर्पण और अंतर मौन की ओर ले जाने वाला रास्ता।\nयह केवल आरती को समझने का प्रयास नहीं - यह साईं बाबा के दिल की भाषा को सुनने का अवसर है।\n🔔 आपने इसे गाया है…अब इसे सच्चे अर्थों में समझने का समय है।\n\n#sai #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #like #comment #share#explore #fyp #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #values #youtube#zili#shraddha#saburi #newgeneration#peace #saisatcharitra#young #corespirituality #saileelarahasya#viral …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "6,842 views",
    "Likes": "410"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई सनातनी नहीं हैं ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wqaIcITCd04",
    "Transcript": "If really We are called devotees of Baba. And if we have not read Sai Satcharitra or it is not included as our studies daily, or we do not have time to read one chapter daily then how can we call ourselves educated? If I ask a question here. How many people are educated here? Raise your hands, everyone will raise their hands. But if I ask another question, how many people read Sai Satcharitra daily, then maybe one or two hands will raise. So this is our condition. That is why all these questions are raising and have put us in confusion Today I am taking up a controversy, many people are running this controversy against Baba with great force that Sai Baba is not a believer in perennial philosophy (Sanatana). This controversy is spreading rapidly on social media today. So, I felt that being a Sai bhakta it is our duty that I should speak something on this topic. I cannot state that whatever I say, those people will stop their false propaganda. But those who have faith in Baba, have trust in Baba, if they have this doubt in their mind, because there are many people today who earlier believed in Baba but due to this false propaganda, they are cutting themselves off from Baba. The problem today is that today their children are questioning them saying father today we heard this or that about Sai Baba in the video and they keep Sai Satcharitra scripture in front of them and say that see what your Baba is saying, he used to eat meat, your Baba used to give bad words to women, see your Baba used to puff chillim. There are many questions father, so give us answer to these, what is all this and the father has no answers. Children say that Sai Baba is good for you, henceforth I will not come to Shirdi, I will join some such other institute where all such things do not happen. Father has spent his entire life devoted to Baba but today he is helpless because he cannot guide his child in proper way. Because he does not have answers. Such people who are devoted to Baba and if they have any dilemma in their mind then this talk is for them. ll those who are into anti propaganda of Baba I do not want to say anything about them. There are somethings which are not clear pertaining to Baba, whatever light he has shown me I will try to put up these things in front of you, rest you can judge. The topic “Saibaba is not a Sanatani.” Saibaba is a Muslim and these days he has been given a new name, that he was a “Chandmia”. Don’t know from where this “Chandmia” has come. Whose idea is this, why they got this idea, why are they writing such things I do not want to fall in to these things but they made Baba “Chandmia”. That he is a Muslim and that he came to corrupt the religion of Hindus and Hindus are stupid, and they are trapped in his court by going there, there are many such This answer is not for them but those who have faith in him, those who believe in Baba, if these questions have arisen in their mind, then I have to address that, I want to give clarity to my people and with this intention I am handling this topic so listen to it with faith and attention. They say that Saibaba is not Sanatani so my answer is ‘Who is more Sanatani than Sai? . I am giving an answer ‘Who is more Sanatani than Sai?’ First, we will see what Sanatana dharma is. What is called Sanatan Dharma? Then we will come to Baba and see if Baba is Sanatani or not. First let us define what Sanatana dharma is. What is called Sanatana Dharma? The history of Sanatan dharma comes from Vedic tradition. What has been mentioned in the Vedas, the secrets of Vedas, this tradition begins from there and it is very ancient. It is so ancient that even when there was no word like dharma in this world from that time everyone believed in Vedic dharma. Meaning of Sanatana is eternal. That religion which is eternal. It cannot be that it is there today but may not be there tomorrow. This is eternal, it was there yesterday, is there today and will always be there forever. That is why eternal is called Sanatana. One meaning of Sanatana is eternal. There was a time when Sanatana Dharma was world’s religion (dharma). There was no religion ancient than this. Vedic religion was the only religion of the world. But then there were some plunderers who came and invaded our country and robbed us and that is why there was slight variation in religion. Some foreign missionaries came and they converted people and due to this much harm was done to Vedic religion. There has been a history of Sanatana Dharma now this Sanatan Dharma is limited to India. Whereas it was world’s religion. Inspite of facing so many setbacks, no one could touch the eternity principle So many invaders came, they came and looted the country and many people did conversions, all this happened but Vedic religion did not budge from its place. Its grip is so strong and the depth it has, till this world exist that too will exist because it is eternal. There is a famous shloka from Rig Ved ‘Ekam Sat Vipra Bahudha Vadanti’. Sat means that which cannot be destroyed, that which is eternal, that soul is one, many scholars call it by different names but that Sat is one that is the soul. S Some call it Allah, some call this soul God, some call it Wahe Guru. By whatever name it is called its identity is soul. There is only one eternal thing. And in our scripture, there is a sentence - Vasudev Kutumbakam. This whole Earth, all the religion of the Earth, all the sects, all types of people living there, they may belong to any country, they may be from any sect, religion all of them are our family. This is the essence of the Vedas. There is one more statement and that statement is for Lord Krishna. Krishna is said to be Krishnam Vande Jagat Gurum. Krishna for us is Guru of the world. If Krishna is World Guru for us then is he not guru of the Muslims, is he not Guru of the Christians. All the religions that flourish in the world, Guru of all of them is Krishna. our Vedic culture was so huge and is so even today. To say that it was is also wrong. But the grip it had in ancient time is not there today some people have, because our country was captured, lot of harm was done due to which it is shaken a bit but its roots are strongly holding on to the Vedic Dharma. This was the definition of Sanatana Dharma. The depth and the vastness of Sanatana Dharma, it accepted all the religions and it gave the world that vastness that was Vedic religion, Santana Dharma. The depth and vastness of Sanatana Dharma is so much that it saw all religions as One. It never looked down on any religion. That is why on the banner behind is written ‘All religions are good if we are true to our religion’. In reality do you know that why we see errors in other’s religion? Because we do not know our religion properly. If we understand our religion properly for example, I am a Hindu, if I understand the Vedic Dharma properly then that vastness has to come within me, that I see every religion with the same goodwill. And if I am a Muslim and if the depth of Qur’an Sheriff truly touches my heart, then I will not see any errors in other religions. If I am a Christian and if I am able to properly understand the Bible, if I am able to grasp the teachings the way He wanted me to grasp then I will not see any errors in other religions. I see the errors and shortcomings of other religions I see the errors and shortcomings of other religions because I have not understood my own religion. f I understand my religion properly then I will not see mistakes in other religions. If I see mistakes in other religions, if I see errors in other religions, if I see shortcomings in other religions, it means that I have not understood my religion properly. That is why what has been written behind, all religions are good if we are true to our religion if we understand our religion properly then we will be able to see the vastness of all the religions of the world. We will be able to see it with the same large perspective Now I will come to Saibaba. That Saibaba was not Sanatani. In this whole universe if anyone has lived the Vedic teachings then it is Saibaba and today the same Saibaba is not Sanatani. Vedic tradition tells us that there is unity in diversity. No matter how much diversity is there in our country – it is said that there is Unity in diversity. Despite the diversities unity is still there. And in the whole Universe it is not there anywhere else. So many religions flourish in one country and that country is India. This is because in every pore of the country Vedic culture is present. We understand ‘Vasudev Kutumbakam’, we understand ‘Ekam Sat Vipra Bahudha Vadanti’ and today on this planet Earth the one who have lived the teachings and shown to the world that all the religions are one, Sab ka Malik ek hai, who lived with this slogan all his life and came as a Messiah for the people of all religions to show light to the world. Today the same messiah is in court dock, that he is not a Sanatani. The same Saibaba is no more a Sanatani. Now I will come to Sai Satcharitra. In reality what is Sai Satcharitra? Sai Satcharitra is Saibaba. Sai Satcharitra is autobiography of Baba and later on he says that He himself is that scripture. Whatever emerges from this scripture that is the norm for us. What all of you say has nothing to do with us. What they do is, they show the small book in Hindi, which does not contain the entire Sai Satcharitra. Taking that small book in the hand, showing pages of the book they say, see your Saibaba was eating meat, your Saibaba used to puff chillim, do drugs, your Saibaba used to verbally abuse women. They say things out of reference and mislead people. But actually, that is not the original Sai Satcharitra. Actually, because everyone will not be able to read that big scripture, Sansthan printed the small book. Our misfortune today is that we are not even able to read that book. We call ourselves educated and we also call ourselves devotee of Baba but we do not have that much time that we read life of Baba properly. And this is a very sad story. We do not have that much time that we read Baba’s scripture once properly and understand it. Do you know what is the misfortune is that we call ourselves literate. We are all educated. What education is it that the one whom you believe to be your Sadguru, you don’t have his scripture in your hand. Today you go to Iskcon, it is such a good institute – Iskcon – International Shri Krishna Consciousness. They spend their entire life explaining Bhagwat Geeta. But today why this propaganda against Sai will not happen? Because who has brought Baba’s real form in front of the world? How many people want to bring out Baba’s real form? How many people are living and dying for that? All the questions that are been asked are not without reason. It is because of us. We do not have that much time and on top of it whatever they have said we have accepted. Because we are useless and cannot read, cannot understand. So, what is said is the norm. Perhaps they are right, if it is written in the book, then it would be right. Then after coming here, our search curbs. If really We are called devotees of Baba. And if we have not read Sai Satcharitra or it is not included in our studies daily, we do not have time to read one chapter daily, then how can we call ourselves educated? Let me ask a question here. How many people are educated here? Raise your hands, everyone will raise their hands. But if I ask another question, how many people read Sai Sachcharitra daily, then maybe one or two hands will raise. So this is our condition. That is why all these questions are raising and have put you in confusion When a boy asks a question to his father, Papa, all these questions are being asked about your Saibaba. Please tell me what is the answer? Papa doesn't have any answer. Son, I did blind devotion, you too doing blind devotion leave this world Today, for a Krishna devotee what is greater than Bhagavad Gita just tell me. Which Krishna devotee would be there who does not know Bhagavad Gita? But we are such Sai devotees that we don't even know whether there is the book called Sai Satcharitra. Many do not know. But we are Sai devotee It is a big irony. It is a very painful thing. And we call ourselves educated. We all are educated. This is education. Whom we consider as our everything, whom you consider as your Sadguru We not willing to understand, read or know about him I am remembering a story, please listen carefully, our condition is the same. here was a poor, destitute person. living his life in poverty. Destitute for every little thing. Wearing rags. If got to eat in the morning then don't know about the afternoon. If got to eat in the afternoon then not sure about the night. His life is being spent in such poverty. He is living in a broken hut. Living such conditions he has turned 90 years old. But his life is not dying out. Coming at the last moment the needle is stuck. Never knew whether his life will go now or then, at that moment a great saint comes to his door seeking alms. So he looks at the old man and as his life will fly away he asked him, \"what problem did you have?\", So he says, what problem i lived in poverty all my life and died in poverty, just waiting for the breath to come out So as soon as he says that, that Mahatma who seeking alms has come to his house. He sees it with his eyes closed and says, What should I say about your misfortune? how unfortunate a person you are, so that pauper asks,\" why is he speaking like this?\" He says, \"The hut in which you spent all your days of poverty. There is a lot of wealth buried beneath it and you have spent your whole life on the same land and now the time has come for you to leave in destitute Today we are coming to know that our condition is also going to be the same. There is a treasure buried in our hearts too called Sai Satcharitra. Maybe we will open it when our last breath is getting stuck. Maybe we will open those pages then. Not before that. That story absolutely suits us. We don't have time. what kind of Sai devotee we are? And how can we know the real nature of Baba if Sai Satcharitra is not in our hands, which Baba speaks, this scripture is I. If he has said such a big thing that I am a scripture. And if the same is not in my hands. How will I know Baba, then our condition is exactly like that of a poor person. Like that poor person, living in poverty all his life dying every moment. But in the last moments he came to know that under the very earth on which he sobbed and breathed his last, there was a heap full of golden coins Our situation is also like this, maybe after a very long time, Sai Satcharitra Granth will come in our hands. So please, I request you all, do not let that situation happen to you. Today you have been told that that pot is in your hands now. Go immediately, get the book in your hand and start practicing it. Otherwise, you will get nothing but regrets later. And prove that you are really educated. Spare this much time at least. I always say one thing. if a moment's bath is missed, let it be missed. Please listen carefully. If a moment's bath is missed, let it be missed. If a meal for a moment is missed, let it be missed. If one hour of sleep is missed, let it be missed. But do not miss a chapter of Sai Satcharitra. In reality, sitting with the scripture means sitting in the company of the sacred text, that too live, in the presence of Baba. Because Baba has said that this scripture is me, and sitting with it in hands means sitting in Baba's companionship, sitting live. If we do not have that much time. So please do not call yourself a Sai devotee. Yes, if you are not educated, then it is a different matter. If you have been blessed by Maa Saraswati. But despite that, if you do not have Sai Sachcharitra Granth in your hand and you daily don't read it. then nothing can be more foolish than this. So today the accusation is made about Baba that Saibaba is not Sanatani, so right now I will give, from this Sai Sachcharitra Granth, so many such examples where this It will be known that who was or is more Sanatani than Baba? I extract it from Sai Sachcharitra only chapter 53 verse 161 says, \"vedant vishaya ati gahan, virakti bhakti nyan jod deun, aise granth karne nirmaan,gurukripeun durghat.\" The subject of Vedanta is very profound and that subject of Vedanta has been simplified with the support of devotion, dispassion and knowledge by Baba and made this scripture so easy that you could read and understand the depth of Vedanta through the miracles of Baba. It means this book is going to open the depth of Vedanta. So if this Sai Satcharitra book is going to open the mystery of Vedanta. If the Sanatan Dharma is rooted in Vedanta, then how did Baba not become a part of the Sanatan tradition? now second in Taytriya Upanishad there comes about Panchsuna Mahapaap. Five type of sins happen from the hands of every human being everyday. They are Small germs die while taking out water. Small germs die while washing utensils. While bathing, small germs die. we are afflicted by the sin of killing them too. Many Germs die in the process of grinding flour, this is called Panchmahasuna Paap, and PanchMaha Yagya has been talked about for it that if one feeds birds, animals, or guests every day, it is considered as avoiding five great sins or else otherwise one will get into these five great sins and will have to pay the price for the sins one has committed in birth after birth. That is why Panch Mahayagya is prescribed for these five great sins. Atithi Yagya, Bhoot Yagya, Veda Yagya, Brahma Yagya. If you do all these things like feeding the guests, feeding the ancestors, offering sacrifices in Yagya and sharing the knowledge of Vedanta that you acquire, then you will be saved from the Panch Maha Sun. So now this thing is mentioned in Taitriya Upanishad. But Baba took that depth of that Upanishad in the ninth chapter of Sai Sachcharitra. So that people realize that these five major sins are committed by us, hence from today onwards we have to perform this Panchmahayagya for this five sins So see, what was the need to put that depth of Taitriya Upanishad in Sai Sachcharitra? It has been discussed in full detail in the ninth chapter of Sai Satcharitra. Such Sai Baba is said that is not Sanatani. Now Let me give you one more proof. In Kathopanishad, it has been said about Shreya(path of the good or the virtuous) and Preya(path of the pleasant or enjoyable). Kathopanishad is all about explaining what is Shreya and what is Preya? And Baba described that Shreya and Preya of Kathopanishad in the 17th chapter of Sai Sachcharitra. I have come up with a video on what is Shreya and what is Preya. If you want to see, you can see. So what was the need to include that thing of Kathopanishad in Sai Sachcharitra? It means that Sai satcharitra is filled with entire Vedanta. Baba revealed the entire storehouse of Upanishads in Sai Satcharitra but Sai baba is not Sanatani? Now let me take one more example, Iahavasya Upanishad, for the complete depth of Ishavasya Upanishad Baba devoted the entire chapter to it. Sai Satcharitra 20th Chapter Despite this, Sai Baba is not Sanatani. Now I come to the Bhagavad Gita. Thirty-fourth verse of the fourth chapter of the Bhagavad Gita,'tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśhnena sevayā upadekṣhyanti te jñānaṁ jñāninas tattva-darśhinaḥ.\" Baba has spent two chapters in the Sai Satcharitra on this verse, chapter no 39 and 50. Despite that, Sai Baba is not Sanatani. This is a stigma on Baba. And in Chapter seven, there is a description that Baba used to stay in a mosque, but there was also a bell in the mosque. There was also Tulsi (holy basil) in Vrindavan, and the worship of fire was always performed.\" such was that mosque What did Baba want to explain? He showed it wholeheartedly that all religions are one. If you call it a mosque then the conduct is like a temple and if you call it a temple then the conduct is like a mosque. But we did not even touch that depth. Got it. But today we are so trapped in fanaticism that even Baba has to be fanaticized, he has to be proved to be a Muslim. At any cost So Baba used to live in a mosque on one side, but as many temples were there in Shirdi during Baba's time. Be it Shankar Parvati, Maruti temple, Ganesh ji temple, they were in ruins but Baba got them renovated. He got those temples renovated. So Baba had the same love for every religion, every sect. Never looked down on anyone. But today the same Baba is not Sanatani. What is the true Sanatan Dharma? This is the specialty of Sanatan Dharma - unity in diversity. The one who looks at all the religions with one eye and has that much vastness in his heart is Sanatani. He is the true Sanatani. So that true Sanatan Dharma was lived by one Sai Baba in the entire universe. But he is not Sanatani. And in truth, fanaticism in the name of religion is a very dangerous thing. We know very well the people, the countries, the religions who lived the life of fanaticism what is their condition today. So the greatness of our culture is unity in diversity. This is our dignity. Please preserve it. And Baba has shown it practically by saying that everyone's master is one. This is His greatness. But today he is not Sanatani. First of all, our problem is that we do not know the meaning of Sanatan Dharma. We have forgotten the vastness of Sanatan Dharma. In the entire universe, there is one Hindustan where so many religions grow and flourish. There is no such country. And that real Sanatan Dharma Baba demonstrated throughout his life. But Baba is not Sanatani. I take a few lines. This ends the talk. Please listen carefully this Lines This is India o people of world. There is no other country on earth like this. From the depth of Vedas, Upanishads Here, the thirst of every living being is quenched. Not only humans but even stones breathe on this earth. whenever fanaticism will raise its poisonous hood then all religions are in harmony will make it dance to tune of the Damroo (traditional Indian musical instrument and a type of drum) This is that Garden where all kinds of flowers bloom. This is a gathering where all kinds of people get dressed up O people of the world, this India is the only country on earth where every kind of religion flourishes with great pomp and show. Our arms are so big that no religion is alien to us. but yes. We will never bow down to poisonous fanaticism. This is India o people of world. There is no other country on earth like this. Om sai ram. one which apprehends mind, the destroyer of curses, the remover of ignorance, the giver of salvation, the supreme benefactor, the bestower of true existence, consciousness, and bliss with infinite divine qualities, divine mother who gave birth to Sai, direct form of Sai, diadem of all scriptures, glory to Shree Sai satcharitra the divine book",
    "Description": "साई सनातनी नहीं हैं ?\n\n1. Shrey Prey \n\n   • श्रेय या प्रेय.... जीवन बदलने वाली सत्संग ...  \n\n2. Isha Vasya Upanishad\n\n   • Ep 46 - ना पूर्ण भोगी, ना पूर्ण त्यागी, के...  \n\n\n3. Bhagwad Geeta Shlok\n    • भगवद्गीता का श्लोक का अद्भुत  भावार्थ स्वय...  \n\n#sai #saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #genzyoutube #spiritualism#millennials #instagram #trending #like #comment #share#explore #fyp #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #values #youtube#zili#shraddha#saburi #newgeneration#peace #saisatcharitra#young #corespirituality #saileelarahasya#viral …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "35,522 views",
    "Likes": "1,385"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई के तीन तरह के भक्त - स्वार्थी निस्वर्थी परमार्थी",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e3nEhQfIeu4",
    "Transcript": "Om Sai Ram Words of Shri Krishna from Bhagvad Gita, \"O Arjun in this world Devotees are of four types understand them carefully. They are Arth, Artharti, Jigyasu, Gyani. Arth is the one who reveres me to get oneself out of some sort of adversity Artharti is the one who reveres me with a desire or for the fulfillment of some wish. Jigyasu is the one whose devotion is not of selfish motives he/she reveres me to know this world and its creator and Gyani is the one who himself being an ocean of knowledge Who never ceases to be devoted to me inspite of being one with me by knowing my identity completely O Arjun he is my extremely loving devotee I resides in him and he resides in me if the story would be contradictory for baba suggesting to invest the money and would be lost I am narrating the story of Damu Anna Kasar from Chapter 25, it is a leela where the depth lies in how Baba safeguards Damu Anna Kasar against future losses. it is that story 25th chapter verse no 25 to 33 tya yaa damuannanchi katha, shravanarthiya nivedito ata, shravan karita savadhanta, saisamarthata prakatel If you carefully understand the intricacies of this story, you will realize how crucial Sai's wisdom is in this context. Damu Anna has a friend from Mumbai who writes him a letter, proposing a business investment with a potential profit of 2 lakhs. The friend suggests that if the deal goes through, Damu Anna will get half of the profit. In those times, a lakh (100,000) was a significant amount, even more tempting than 10 crore today. That big was the bait If we encounter such a temptation, then we all are Damu Anna. Damu Anna is not a character from books. \"Quickly respond, and let me know , and there's a 100% certainty of earning 1 lakh. We buy cotton; there's a tremendous demand in the market If you don't act promptly, you'll regret it later\", writes Damu Anna's friend in the letter. Don't let this moment slip away; don't let this opportunity slip through your fingers. It was just a matter of reading the letter, and Damu Anna's wings have sprouted, his feet are not yet on the ground; his friend showed him a dream, and this guy is soaring in the air. And he has so much trust in his friend, who is such an exceptional businessman that he has never faced betrayal. This experienced individual wants to make me his partner, so I consider myself fortunate that he has come to my home in the form of a letter. But Damu Anna's mind is not filled with stability; however, he is a bit skeptical now. Have now alight to ground He was floating in the air moments ago, but now, after hearing the proposal, he is back on the ground, with some hesitation. Now he's here, should he engage in the business or not? A contemplation has begun in Damu Anna's heart. He doesn't know whether he will gain 1 lakh or lose it. The meaning of business is risk there could be profit, there could be loss. \"But Damu Anna had deep faith in Baba. \"We don't have our own independent intellect, Baba; you are supreme for us. Without seeking your guidance, I cannot take such a significant risk\" Saying this Damu Anna writes a letter to Shyama Now, the letter reaches to shayma who reads it first and then takes it to Baba. Without mentioning the contents of the letter, Shyama doesn't say anything about it to baba, and Baba responds, 'Chapter 25, Verse 38.'\" Oh Shyam, what does Damu Anna write? What is going on in his mind? What plans are brewing in his thoughts? It seems he has intentions of reaching for the sky.\" \"What God is giving is not satisfying him.\" Now, Baba has made this clear, and everything is evident in this line. \"Now, Shyam is being presented as Nandi for baba , mentioned in Chapter 11, Now Let's see how Shyam leads Damu Anna Kasar to a wrong path. \"In response to this, Shyam now writes a letter to Damu Anna, stating that Baba gave such an answer. However, in the letter, Shyam adds another point, to mislead him.\" It was written that 'There is a significant difference between hears(ears) and sees(eyes). Who knows, your physical presence might change Baba's mind after coming here.' Damu Anna is already caught in desires, which Baba has now extinguished. And now, it is Shyam who is fueling the fire.\" And he cleverly responds, \"Just as there is a difference between what one hears and sees, there is a distinction between hearing and experiencing in person. Who knows, seeing you physically in front of him might change Baba's intentions. Perhaps he might give you permission.' See, such a person cannot be a nanadi. his is the essence of Sai Satcharitra. At one point, Shyam is elevated significantly, and here tossing him down creating twist.\" Then, Ovi 50 to 69, which are important verses, are also considered. Now, Damu Anna begins to wonder if Shyam is right. When desire is strong, even wrong things start to seem right. Who knows, after going in person, Baba might give permission like Baba might give permission like 'Go and earn a lakh of rupees in business.' With this thought, with this thinking Damu Anna goes to Shirdi.\" now for earning lakh, rupees surrender is must \"slowly pressing feet\". Its is essential to do service as to earn one lakh rupees but has no courage to ask about it to baba \"antaryami uthli vritti, babanchi pati thevavi.\" now this is daamu anna he is thinking in his mind while pressing baba's feet that baba if you permit and if 1 lakh profit is incurred then he will offer share to baba So I will give you some part of my profit. now we don't know how much share he kept for baba whether 10 or 15 rupees over 1 lakh if there is so much greed now, then the share will also be less not more than 10 rupees \"o sainath, he said to himself, if only you help me in this transaction, i will offer a part of the profit at your feet.\" he trying to tempt Baba with share \"He bowed at Baba's feet and sat quietly for a moment, his mind clouded with doubt and resolutions, as is characteristic of human mind.\" On one side he is pressing his feet and on the other side he is making plans . If there is a profit, if I earn one lakh rupees, then I will give you a hafta. Nowadays, perhaps they say Hafta in layman terms. So this guy felt that even Sadhguru could be bribed or offered money in exchange for his favour. If I give a particular amount then I will get a benefit of Rs 1 lakh. Devotees make plan but they do not know what their true benefit is in. But only a Sadguru knows the past, future and present of the devotee. Although all this Manoraj (line of thinking /thoughts) Damu Anna pressing his feet, is going on in Anna's mind, not a single word was said to Baba. No matter how much he keeps it secret, Baba is the innermost being, every feeling, every imagination, as it originates, reaches Baba. Because Baba is sitting in our hearts as an intercessor. When someone expresses his feelings before Baba in secret, when someone with a true heart has lost his way, I do not understand, Lord, please show me the right path, I will not take such a decision until I get your permission, if I wait like this When someone sits, Baba says, I am forced to show him the right path. If someone comes to me with faith and asks that question and sits with some patience, I would never let him deviate from it. I show him the true path which will work for his welfare. And in this way, Baba used to remove the troubles of those who took complete refuge in Baba. And Guru is the true parent and the one who breaks the bondage of many births. He is Vishnu, he is Shiva, he is the creator Brahma. That's he is a doer and he is the subject. It is the child who always wants sweets to eat, but the mother gives him a potion of bitter medicinal herbs. But when the mother forces bitter potion, the child cries and wails. But mother forcibly makes him drink bitter medicine which cures the disease. The bitter potion that mother had put in child's mouth bears fruit at the right time. What does that child know about the constant flow of mother's love towards him? The child is feeling that what kind of mother is this who is forcefully putting bitter in his mouth. But shows the same qualities at the right time and cures the disease. I am coming directly on 69th Ovi (Shri sai Satcharitra) When Dammu Anna thinks that, I will offer you this much amount in your name. Now, this is the nature of many of us. We will earn money through illegal business and will come to Baba every month and offer him a sum amount in the name of donation and charity. and think that all our actions and deeds will be forgiven. So many of us have such tendencies. But Baba is completely against it. But still i will say in this situation baba has kept respect for Dammu Anna. Same case happens in the life of Akkalkot Maharaj. A person does wrong business, tells lies, earns money in wrong ways and this is always his habit. After taking some share from his earnings he reaches Akkalkot. He feels that if he has earned so much money unethically, then if he offers it at the feet of Swami, that black money will become white money. He takes it and places it at Swami's feet and immediately Swami shouts, \"You scoundrel, pick up this money and get out of here.\" Still Baba has respected Dammu Anna when he thinks of sharing profit with baba Baba says,\" i am not a party to any of this\". Indirectly Baba said that the bribe you want me to give, I am not a part of it. I do not want \"However on hearing baby's words Damuanna got the message. He abandoned the plan in his mind and with face bent down sat still greatly dejected.\" Baba does not approve of my business, he suppresses his instincts a little. And later when he thinks of another business, Baba says that he will suffer loss in that too, then in the end he leaves that too. This story is actually the saga of a greedy person's greed. Baba did not promote greed in the mind of any of his devotees. In reality this is that story. But today, if you see this story on social media, some people mislead people by making videos that their wish will be fulfilled by reading this chapter. Baba saved that man from harm and huge loss. Baba has saved Dammu Anna from harm but more than that, he has made us realize that greed is not right. But our eyes do not go there. Saved from loss, a miracle happened. Now I will go a little further. I will stop here and move on to the next story. The second story is of Mhalsapati. Chapter 36 (Shri Sai Satcharitra) This story is completely opposite to Dammu Anna. Ovi No 61 Mhalsapati was always attached to Baba's feet. He was going through an economic recession every moment. Desperate need of money. But still Baba does not allow him to get stucked in Greed of money He was coping with such a difficulty Although Baba often used to distribute the money that came to him as dakshina but never once did he give even a pice to mahalsapati who was financially distress mhalsapati too was so self-respecting. He never spread his palm before Sai in entreaty He never extended his hand in front of anyone with the intention of asking for money his financial state was low yet his renunciation was of higher order although bearing the tribulations of poverty he knew the art of always being satisfied with the little he had. Once a kind hearted merchant hansraj by name felt like giving some money to mhalsapati looking at his abject poverty a kind thought of offering him some help rose into the mind of the merchant now look baba himself could have given him why Hansraj is needed. neither he gives nor let others to give But finally that Hansraj slipped the bundle of some notes to Mahalsapati that take it If Baba does not give permission, then I cannot take this money and again pushed it back towards Hansraj mhalsapati had no hunger for money rather but for spirituality who was devoted to Baba's feet with singularity and was a selfless devotee. but Sai would not allow him to touch even a pice and said,\" for my true devotees i would never let them snared by the greed of wealth.\" \"Those who are my true devotees, I never let them get entangled in the allure of wealth\" \" i never let him/her get drowned in the prosperity of wealth\" Look at one hand there is Daamuanna Kasar who is a affluent man but still wants to earn more and on the other there is Mhalsapati is the one who is going through a difficult time A third person wants to give money to him but Baba does not allow him to touch it how contrast are these stories to each other. what we should learn from these. Now third story of Balaji Patil Nevaskar chapter 35 verse 181, 183, 183 Patil, who though in the worldly life was yet totally detached from it. Listen to this story which describes his great spirit of sacrifice Now look, the crop has grown, the crop has been harvested as he is a farmer He used to bring food grains in the bullock cart and pile it up in a heap in the courtyard of dwarkamai to offer it at baba's feet this hardwork that i have done this This is the fruit that I have got in my hands The store of so much grain that I have collected with my labor, Baba is the owner of it, not i assuming this whole of the cultivation grown with hard work he use to fill the carts with it and he used to lay it down in dwarkamai in front of Baba after giving he used to stand spreading his bag supplicating, \"Baba, please give me as you wish; I will take it and manage with that.\" just that much, suppose baba placed two handfuls in his bag he used to take it and subsist it with and that two handfuls for him The attempt here is to convey that it provided sustenance till next cultivation. That's why it is said that if a benefactor gives even 2 pennies, it is equivalent to 2 crore, and if Maya gives even two crores, it is not equal to even two shells. There is a couplet by saint Kabir depicting how dangerous the greed is ? 'jo jal bade naav me ghar me bade daam dono haat ulijiye yehi sayano kaam' might not understood this couplet it says suppose you are traveling by a raft and it has a hole so water will start gushing into the raft through the hole. then how dangerous is the gushing water as it will drown the boat as time passes on the water in the raft will increase and it will sink you similarly if there is an increase in the gain of money then it is as dangerous as the water into the raft. And if a lot of money starts coming into the house, and properties upon properties are being built, people think it's a blessing, but it might actually be a curse. as per Sadguru it is a curse a wise man will try to throw the water off into sea as it fills the boat until he traverse the path to destination. Just like water that comes inside is scooped up and thrown out, similarly, a wise person, no matter how much money comes, quickly engages in righteous deeds and liberates himself while still alive. Does not keep it accumulate. Now here are the three stories. I will ask a question. Every person likes the story of Damuanna from 25th chapter as Baba saved him from harm, it is a wish fulfilling chapter, read this chapter daily It will create a treasure trove of wealth in the house saying this and that has made people's minds go crazy this story of Daamuanna Kasar does not ends here. Here baba has saved him from getting trapped but suppose Damuanna's devotion would be excellent and then he would asks for the permission from Baba and owing to his excellence he would accept baba's order irrespective of profit and loss if he was with this clarity and then baba would have said that to go and invest 1 lakh rupees listen carefully as i m going to say something unique because in my view the story begins from here now assume that Daamuanna is not the one who has fallen prey to greed just wants to take permission from Baba that i m in dilemma because of the business that i have encounter and i m ready for any result and baba tells him to invest 1lakh and this fellow did accordingly consequently he lost all the money now is the real test If Damuanna had the thought in his mind that Baba, I took your command, but You didn't leave me of anywhere, you have ruined everything. then it is not his surrender. Despite being completely destitute, if from his heart he says, \"Master, if you have made me impovrished then today i have become sure that you want to give something valuable to me,\" Your will be done, I am ready to be ruined a crore times in your name, as long as it has your involvement\", if he can say this Then this story is completed. Are you getting what i have said ? if the story was opposite that baba would tell him to invest the money and that entire investment sinks. Still, one should not consider the option that when you knew I was going to drown, why did you let me drown? This question should not appear if you are a true devotee rather a feeling should emerge that master if you have made me lose first of all your holy hands are involved in my loss If your hand is in it, then it will surely be auspicious for me if you can reach till here then Daamuanna of 25th chapter is cleared therefore it is said that Name, Fame, Money, Assets received from Maya is a deception and Every stumble, every trouble, every thorn and every pebble received from Sadguru is a blessing if you can understand this then devotion for guru is understood because Sadguru is a Mayapati and a Mayapati never provides illusion rather he frees from illusion. so i believe that these three stories of Daamuanna, Nevaskar and Mhalsapati If all three stories come together, only then will the subject be clearer I'll leave it on you for now whether you want to become Daamuanna kasar or Mhalsapati or you want to become Nevaskar. I believe that devotion of Nevaskar is incomparable in whole Sai satcharitra He works industriously and when he receives fruit of all his hardwork, he pours it in front of Sai and becoming a beggar beseeches, \" O master give me as per will and i ll take it home.\" it will take millions of lives to understand Nevaskar",
    "Description": "साई के तीन तरह के भक्त - स्वार्थी निस्वर्थी परमार्थी …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "saihridgat, saileelarahasya, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhyaan, krishnaji, krishnaji satsang, mumbaiwale krishnaji, sai satcharitra, sai ki leela ka arth, saibaba ki anokhi leela, sai satcharitra ki leela, saibaba mandir, krishnaji kathakar, saileelarahasya krishnaji",
    "Views": "9,866 views",
    "Likes": "561"
  },
  {
    "Title": "गुरु आज्ञा न मानने का दुष्परिणाम",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T_Byynewr08",
    "Transcript": "If you look at this deeply the vata disease has a very deep connection with the intellect of a person. It is said that only such a person suffers from Vata disease who has played games with his intellect. He has misused it. To know the wish of Guru and conduct according to it is real devotion of Guru Om Sai Ram. In Adhyay 22 of Sai Satcharitra there is a story of Amir Shakkar. Shri Amir Shakkar, a resident of Bandra had brokerage business due to which he was well off. But he had arthritis, joint pains. He took many treatments but it did not help him. Finally, he came to Saibaba’s feet and explained his agony to Baba. Baba advised him to stay in Chavadi and ordered him that henceforth he need not come to Dwarakamai for Darshan. As per Baba’s wish Shri Amir Shakkar started staying in Chavadi. But Chavadi’s state was so bad that even a healthy person would not stay for even a day. And Amirji was troubled with the joint pains. In that state it was difficult for him also to stay there. Even then he stayed there for a few months but the state that the Chavadi was in, even his patience reached its limits and he decided to go home before 9 months were over. One day he leaves Chavadi and on the way he spends a night in an inn. There was an old fakir who was gaping due to thirst. Out of compassion Amirji gave him water to drink. But at the very next moment the old fakir dies Seeing this Amir got scared. And he took the path to Shirdi. Then, here a question arises. It is a good deed to offer water to drink, then what leela did Baba do with Amirji and we will throw light on this aspect today. Om Sai Ram. Adhyay 22 – Amir Shakkar. Amir’s Shakkar’s Leela is a reverse leela. If we see the whole Adhyay 22, then it is known for avoiding devotee’s misfortune. The whole Adhyay has leelas describing this. But Amir Shakkar’s Leela is exact opposite of other leelas. This leela is about Sadguru’s words ‘Kartum, akartum, anyatha kartum. The doings of Sadguru are sometimes opposite. Every time every action will not bear same fruits. Sometimes it yields opposite results. This is one such leela anyatha kartum. Amir is suffering from arthritis. There are different types of arthritis. Medical science knows of this. There is one type of arthritis which is known as auto immune disease. Auto immune disease is when one part of the body starts fighting another part of our body. They clash against each other and in this way a person becomes weaker by the day because our own one part of the body starts fighting another part of the body. Due to this our immunity decreases and sometimes a person may die. This is auto immune disease. Amir Shakkar was suffering from this disease. Amir Shakkar was very rich and he stayed in Bandra and was slaughterer by profession and there was no dearth of money. Different treatments were done but there were zero results and he was not healed. He did not get well. At the end listening to Baba’s fame, he goes Shirdi to Baba. He goes to Shirdi and takes baba’s darshan. Baba gives him Darshan but he says that your cure is only one that you stay in Chavadi for 9 months. Till such time you will not come for my darshan also. This was Baba’s cure that for nine months stay at Chavadi. He does not give any medicines or any antidote, only he has to stay for 9 month and that is your medicine. First, he does not understand with such a small treatment how his work will be done? He has so much faith in Baba so he also has this faith and he goes and stays in Chavadi. The moment he goes there and starts staying there then he understands what Chavadi is. Chavadi has been so beautifully described in Sai Satcharitra in Adhyay 22 and every person should read it from the heart it is so beautifully expounded upon. It is said that Chavadi was not fit for even an animal to stay. And in that Chavadi a person is sent as though for life imprisonment. You have to stay there for 9 months. Describing the Chavadi Hemadpantji says. In that Chavadi there were snake, scorpion, frogs and it was house for them in a way and there were so many potholes and all the walls used to be moist, there was no roof. In a way it was a painful imprisonment and Amir Shakkar stay there for 9 months and that is your cure is what Baba said. In the beginning he makes up his mind and stays there and after some time his mind gets restless. He was asked to stay there for 9 months but after some time his mind becomes restless. What is there here? Already I am suffering at physical level. Because those who are suffering from vata dosha, the moisture on the wall, the dampness, all these things will increase the disease disease and the wetness of the floor and does anyone like that? And don’t know how many such things plays in the mind of Amir Shakkar and somewhere his courage and patience breaks. And before 9 months he makes up his mind now enough is enough I stayed here for as many months as I could, now I can’t do this anymore. So, without telling one night he leaves from there and after going to Kopargao I will take a train to Mumbai. With such thought he leaves in the night. He does not tell anyone. Since he was going to take the train in the morning in Kopergao then where to spend the night? Then so as there was no other alternative, he goes to an inn in Kopergao. That somehow, I will spend the night here then in the morning I will wake up and take the train and go to Bandra Mumbai. So, the inn to which he goes at night to stay, there is a Fakir there who is very thirsty. And he asks water from Amir Shakkar. Thinking that it is a pious deed he gives him a glass of water. The moment he drinks it, he dies. The moment he dies he goes haywire. What is this? I gave him water out of compassion. It is said that water is life but for him it became the reason for his death. He gets scared. What to do now? Tomorrow morning when the Sun rises and people will come and see this, they will think that I killed him. That I am a murderer. Then out of fear he makes up his mind and I have to leave from here as soon as possible. I should go back from where I came. He leaves from there quietly and reaches Chavadi before Sun rise. This is the Leela of Adhyay 22 of Amir Shakkar. The question is Baba made him stay in an extreme state in Chavadi and why did he ask him to stay in Chavadi for 9 months? If you look at this deeply the vata disease has a very deep connection with the intellect of a person. It is said that only such a person suffers from Vata disease who has played games with his intellect. He has misused it. Intelligence is not given to animals it is given only to humans by God so that he makes good use of it. So that he reaches newer heights. So that he touches the states which are beyond this body that is why intelligence is given. He makes good use of that intelligence. God has given intelligence to reach the soul and paramatma. But if the same intelligence is misused, but if we use it for our own benefit and play with other people’s life then vata disease knocks on the life of such people it is said. That is why it is called auto immune disease. Because you kept playing with the world on the strength of your intellect you had forgotten that the world is part of you so whatever wrongs you have done to them has come back to you and so one part of your own body is fighting with the other part and that is why you are suffering from vata disease. Till such time you do not spend 9 months in such extreme conditions, like how a child wriggles in a womb, he eats what the mother eats, sour, salty, everything the child endures for 9 months it is said. Similarly, you also in these extreme conditions. Definitely the environment is averse to your disease in Chavadi. The dampness, the chill will give you many types of troubles but inspite of this you have to spend 9 months here because your deeds are such. Because you have misused your intelligence that is why you have to spend 9 months here. If baba disciplined anybody, if he said something to somebody then there use to be lot of depth to it. He will not say without reason. His deeds were such and he was also a slaughterer. So, if he is a slaughterer and it is my work to chop goats but if I did it as my profession but I have not even a little bit of compassion for the goats, that they too have life and they also must be suffering. If there is not even a trace of such emotions then I am not worthy of being called a human. This story has many dimensions. That is why Baba is charging him heavily. That is why you will stay for 9 months here only. And that is your cure. He shows faith for some months the moment his faith waivers he leaves. The question you asked now that giving water to drink to a fakir is an act of merit but how the opposite happened? If you want to understand the answer deeply then Baba only wants to say here is if you disobey Guru’s orders, you can go to any part of the world and perform meritorious acts the results will be horrendous. This is the biggest lesson he gives us through this leela. Disobeying Guru’s order I can go anywhere in the world, I may do good deeds in the world the result will be opposite. But at the same time obeying the Guru’s order you commit bad crimes, the exact opposite comes in Adhyay 23, he is asking to cut the goat, he Leela of Kakasaheb Dixit, there he asks to commit a grave crime but there is no bigger pious act than this because these are Guru’s order. And disobeying Guru’s order you give life to a person then you will be the reason for death. This Leela is the best way to tell the importance of Guru’s orders. If Baba is telling him to stay in that terrible Chavadi than the reason behind it is also very deep. Because the karmas behind this is such. So, the cure is also so serious. And here after doing such a pious act he invites such a big trouble on his head, the reason behind this is only disobeying guru’s orders. There is Kabirji’s doha on this and if I don’t take it then this will be incomplete. So, I will take up that doha. He says Raja ki chori kare, rahe ranka ki oat. You have to understand this carefully. Raja ki chori kare, rahe ranka ki oat, Kahe Kabir kyu ubhare, kaal kathin ki chot. So here Kabirji says, here I will clear the meaning raja ki chori kare. Say there is a person and he steals a valuable from king’s house, rahe ranka ki oat and he goes and hides himself at a poor man’s place. He is in King’s city, he has stolen from King’s house and there is a person who is a beggar and takes shelter in his house saying save me because I have committed such a big theft, I have stolen a valuable thing, will he be saved? It is not possible. Because it is king’s city. Then Kabirji says Kahe Kabir kyu ubhare, kaal kathin ki chot. Such people how can they be saved the time is there to hit hard. The way it is present in the universe he is present there also wherever you go. Here theft in King’s house means if I turn my face away from Guru’s order, instead of facing the Guru I turn my face away from the Guru, if I have averted my eyes from him and even if I take shelter in a poor man’s house, I am not going to rise there then death will knock on the door. The point I make here is If I disobey Guru, I may go to any corner of the universe there is only doom and doom for me. So, Amir Shakkar’s leela is all about this. one which apprehends mind, overcomes bane and calamities, annihilates ignorance, bestows deliverance, the ultimate source of welfare, truth awareness and bliss giver mother of sai, direct form of sai, diadem of all scriptures, glory to shree sai satcharitra divine granth",
    "Description": "🕉️ श्री साईं सच्चरित्र | अध्याय 22 | अमीर शक्कर जी की कथा\n🎙️ कृष्णाजी की गहन और भावपूर्ण व्याख्या के साथ\n🎧 Deep spiritual analysis and soulful narration by Krishnaji\n\nइस अध्याय में हमें एक दिव्य संदेश मिलता है — जब बाबा ने अमीर शक्कर जी को चावड़ी में नौ महीने रुकने का आदेश दिया, तो इसके पीछे एक गहरा आध्यात्मिक कारण था।\nक्या आप जानते हैं कि बाबा ने उनके लिए वही स्थान क्यों चुना?\nयह स्थान केवल एक भौतिक जगह नहीं था, बल्कि एक अध्यात्मिक परीक्षा और आत्मा के शोधन का केंद्र था।\n\n🌼 गुरु की आज्ञा का महत्व क्या है?\n🌼 अगर हम गुरु की आज्ञा के विपरीत जाकर पुण्य कर्म भी करें तो उसके क्या दुष्परिणाम हो सकते हैं?\n🌼 और क्यों गुरु की आज्ञा ही हमारे जीवन में सर्वोपरि होनी चाहिए?\n\nIn this profound chapter, Sai Baba teaches us that true spiritual progress demands absolute obedience to the Guru’s command — even when it seems difficult or incomprehensible.\nAmir Shakkar Ji’s nine months at the Chaavadi symbolize surrender over comfort, faith beyond logic, and the power of divine discipline.\n\n👉 Through Krishnaji’s deep insight and heartfelt narration, this video explores:\n\nWhy Sai Baba chose the Chaavadi for Amir Shakkar’s healing journey\nHow disobedience to the Guru’s order, even in the name of good deeds, can bring unforeseen consequences\nThe supreme importance of placing the Guru’s will above all worldly actions\n💫 गुरु की आज्ञा वह अमूल्य धागा है जो हमें जीवन के भ्रम में स्थिरता और दिव्यता की ओर ले जाता है।\n💫 True surrender is the doorway to Baba’s infinite grace.\n\n🙏 इस आध्यात्मिक कथा को ध्यान से सुनिए, अनुभव कीजिए, और गुरु की आज्ञा के महत्व को अपने जीवन में आत्मसात कीजिए।\n🙏 May this sacred Leela inspire your heart to surrender fully and walk the path of true devotion.\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiSatcharitra #Chapter22 #Krishnaji #GuruAgya #SpiritualSurrender #FaithAndObedience #SaiLeela #श्रद्धासबुरी #आध्यात्मिक_कथा #GuruBhakti …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, sai, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, sai songs, saiwani, sai baba songs, miracles, saibaba miracles, chamatkar",
    "Views": "7,181 views",
    "Likes": "421"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Autobiography of Sai",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4bl-KAq1HFw",
    "Transcript": "[संगीत] [संगीत] य साई सचित मानो हमसे कह रही है मैं तुम्हारे जीवन का श्रृंगार हूं मैं ही यह साई सच्चित तुम्हारे अस्तित्व का सार हूं कहां तुम पेड़ की शाखाओं और सूखे पत्थे बटोरने में हो गाफिल मैं ही उस पेड़ की जड़े और आधार हूं जानकारियों के कंकर पत्थर का सर पर तुम्हारे क्यों है इतना भार मैं तो तुम्हारे माथे पर धमक वाला एक कोहिनूर हूं अनंत तारों की झिलमिलाती जुगन सी रोशनी से क्यों हो तुम इतना सराबोर न सिर्फ तुम बल्कि पूरी कायनात हो रोशन जिससे मैं वह भास्कर हूं एक अदना सा कीड़ा मकोड़ा बनकर जमीन पर क्यों रेंग रहे हो तुम तुम जिससे चिता काश की आसमानों की उड़ान भर सको मैं वह पंख वह परवाज हूं हां मैं ही साईं स चरित तुम्हारे जीवन का सार तुम्हारे जीवन का आधार हूं मनो हारिणी शाप ताप निवारनी अज्ञान नाशिनी मोक्ष दाहिनी परम कल्याण काणी सत चित नंद प्रदानी अनंत कोटि साईं नाथों की जननी साक्षात साईं स्वरूपिणी ग्रंथ राज श्री साईं स चरित दिव्य ग्रंथ की जय",
    "Description": "…",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "1,655 views",
    "Likes": "193"
  },
  {
    "Title": "भगवद्गीता का श्लोक का अद्भुत भावार्थ स्वयं साई वाणी में |",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r1cRGBJBpzc",
    "Transcript": "We never talk about the ignorance in which we are trapped 24 hours, we are not even worried about it. But we are trapped in the imaginary words like soul, divine, universal bliss, knowledge of the universe, release, liberation. Om Sai Ram. Adhyay 39 of Sai Satcharitra is about Shloka 34 of Chapter 4 of Bhagwat Gita on Gyan, karma, Sanyas. Tat viddhi pranipātena paripraśhnena sevayā, upadekṣhyanti te jñānaṁ jñāninas tattva-darśhinaḥ. The story goes like this. One of Baba’s supreme devotee Shree Nanasaheb Chandorkar was pressing Baba’s feet in Masjid and was speaking something softly. So, Baba asked “Nana in such soft voice what are you speaking? Speak a little louder so that even I can listen. On Baba’s command he told the entire verse Tat viddhi pranipātena to Baba. Baba asked Nanasaheb the meaning of the Shloka. Nanasaheb humbly explained the meaning of the Shloka. If you ask a knowledgeable person humbly and respectfully any question, then they preach knowledge. In the beginning Baba accepted the meaning as told by Nanasaheb. But Baba said \"Nana, in the shloka where word knowledge is used, before that word there is a sigmoid and the word knowledge looks like ignorance (agyan) and if we use ignorance in its place then what will be the meaning. Listening to Baba, Nanasaheb was confused and thought why would a knowledgeable person preach ignorance. Friends we are living in the 21st century today where everyone is talking about knowledge and positive thinking. But through this Shloka Baba is preaching about ignorance. In this era also how this discourse is useful, we will throw light on this in this episode. Om Sai Ram. Adhyay 39 in a way is a revolutionary Adhyay of Sai Satcharitra. Because before writing this Adhyay or before Baba did this Leela, all the Saints before that, all those who have written commentaries everyone have applied the same meaning that they preach knowledge that too after surrendering with pure heart, after paying obeisance with pure heart, asking question with pure heart. Pure heart means without any pretence. Keeping in mind that the person in front of me is much better than me, surrendering yourself, out of curiosity and desire to know, keeping aside logic and argument, question which is asked with faith is pariprashna. To reach that Pariprashna you have to go through service. These are the conditions laid down. You have the right to ask question only if you do service. And after that Guru gives discourse on Knowledge is what the commentators, Saints, before Baba all those who have given commentary on the Shloka have said that they preach knowledge. And if you see it is the first time that Baba says there is a silent ‘A’ which is hidden. I have not created it. That sigmoid is there, those who know grammar well know that the sigmoid is hidden. If we accept that hidden ‘A’ then it will be preaching ignorance (Agyan). Baba says where is the harm in that. If we think that they give discourse on ignorance (agyan) then what is the harm in that. Baba Says that, in fact all the Shastras accept that soul is self-existent. It was always that, is and will be that. No one can create it nor destroy it. The soul is self-existent. It was there since time immemorial and will remain so till time immemorial. On the contrary the world is super imposed on it. It is the covering of the soul. The thing that was never made how will it be destroyed. It has always been there. Only that the world, this brahmand has been super imposed on it. Baba wanted to say that if you put the sigmoid and you remove the covering then knowledge is self-evident self-existent. In reality the ignorance has covered knowledge. Knowledge is not been created. Knowledge is not been invented. Soul cannot be invented. Nor can Brahma be created. And if is created then it will be destroyed also. That is why Baba wanted to say that there is covering of ignorance (agyan) on it. You just need to remove it. Knowledge (Gyan) is self-existent, self-illuminating. No one can stop that light. You just have to remove the covering. It has its own light; it cannot be created. Baba wanted to say this. The twinkling stars are infinite spreading light like fireflies, but there is only one Sun that pierces the darkness of the night and illuminates the whole world. Similarly, there are crores of people who indulge in and give the joy of discussion of knowledge, but there is only one such devotee who eradicates his own darkness, his own ignorance. But if you see minutely then this ignorance, first of all a true Sadguru is the one who can show the disciple his own ignorance, make him aware of his ignorance, not only show him but also is capable of awakening his yearning. If any Sadguru has these two qualities, who can make the disciple aware of his ignorance and secondly create such deep yearning about the ignorance such that he will not get peace till he comes out of this ignorance. If any Sadguru has these two capabilities, if anyone can do these two things then he is a true Sadguru. This is Baba’s perspective. Just as knowledge is self-existent, similarly ignorance is from time immemorial. It also has its tradition. Because we are always indulging in our wants and desires. We are engrossed in our vices 24 hours a day. There is not a moment where we are not covered with ignorance, we are not full with this ignorance. 24 hours we are trapped in our desires; 24 hours we are trapped in our vices. We never talk about the ignorance in which we are trapped 24 hours, we are not even worried about it. But we are trapped in the imaginary words like soul, divine, universal bliss, knowledge of the universe, release, liberation. For us presently all this is imaginary because we have no experience of it but we always discuss about it. But 24 hours the ignorance that is troubling us, the ignorance which we indulge in 24 hours, this ignorance has become like our breath, we never talk about it. But we talk a lot about the imaginary knowledge. So, Baba wanted to sneer at it. He wanted to tell that 24 hours that you indulge in the ignorance, let us talk about that. Why should we talk about imaginary knowledge. And it is the way of the world, the one who has more informative knowledge, is a bigger Guru. The one who has more information, the one who knows more, bigger is he as a Guru. World also sees them that way and they also feel that they have more information than others. Then I am bigger Guru than you. But we are unable to differentiate that informative knowledge is different and educative experience is different. A good person will never be worried about how much information he has. He will look within and see how ignorant he is and he will be agonized by it. I collected so much information, I know so much, read so many shastras, I read so many Vedas, I have become so knowledgeable, he will not take pride in it. If he is a good person he will see his ignorance, I am trapped in these things 24 hours, I am trapped in wants and desires, I am trapped in vices, trapped in ego, trapped in pride. Baba only wanted to say that the information you collect, ignorance will not be destroyed by that, on the contrary you will increase ignorance. It is very deep. Guru is the one who makes the disciple aware of his ignorance, create a yearning within and when he will be out of it. And a good disciple is one who will not take pride in informative knowledge but will worry about the ignorance within him. These are the two things. Otherwise, what will happen is we will fill ourselves with informative knowledge and the pride will increase. We can never be humble; we will never have the strength to look within. Because the garbage that we are collecting of information, we will take pride in that and again and again, say if someone gives some information you will say I have more information than him. Then we will always take pride in that. We will continue to increase ego. It is natural. It will further increase ignorance. Baba had really understood this. How the whole world is trapped in this knowledge. Then why not have that sigmoid, that silent ‘A’ which is already there and is not been created why not take help from that and Baba created such a big thing. That is why in this Adhyay when Baba tells all this to Nanasaheb Chandorkar, after listening to all this there is a prayer which comes from Nanasaheb Chandorkar which is so touching and has come from his heart and I will take up that prayer here. From the same Adhyay (Adhyay 39) Verse 101 to 104. He speaks about himself here and that is what is special about Nana Saheb Chandorkar. Satvikteche haus varivari, Vikalap date antari, Apman sohna shanbhari, agyan te tari kay duje. (Verse 101) Poti pratisthechi ujari, dhyanvirbhav davi kari, Kamkrodh dhumase bhitari, agyan te tari kay duje. (Verse 102) Atuni sakal karme nasht, baher mirvu brahmisht, Acharhin vicharbrasht, agyan spast kay duje. (Verse 103) Baba apan krupaghan, karoniya krupajalshinchan, kara ha agyandavanal shaman, hoin me dhanya itukeni. (Verse 104) Till such time a person does not live these lines, he does not experience it, when this prayer does not arise with tears in the eyes, till such time the fire of ignorance will not die, Baba will not shower his Grace. Ignorance cannot be eradicated with informative knowledge. If you look within attentively, we have this itch of spirituality, to be very honest. We enjoy talking about spirituality, we enjoy listening about spirituality, we love to read about spirituality and we love to discuss about spirituality with other people. But we do not enjoy looking at the ignorance, looking at and understanding one’s own ignorance, to shed tears for that and pray, we have no interest in doing that. But we really enjoy the spirituality itch. We enjoy that. Spirituality has become our favourite subject. We enjoy discussing it, we enjoy talking about it with each other, we enjoy reading, we enjoy listening but we do not have the strength to eradicate ignorance. Baba probably understood all this. It is not only in Adhyay 39, Baba felt that whatever he has spoken is less and he has spent one more Adhyay on this, Adhyay 50, only to show our ignorance. He felt that this is a very important subject and it should reach the heart of every person. That is why he has composed this and has spent 2 Adhyay on this only to tell us how deeply we are immersed in ignorance. And all these talks about knowledge that we do, with this the fire of ignorance will not die is what Baba says. Krishnaji, i had a question for you, if i look at my ignorance every time then will my stream of thoughts become negative? and what about the optimistic outlook that world talks about? This is a very good question. First of all, let us understand positive thinking and negative thinking. Positive thinking does not mean that you change the basic principle. For e.g. I keep poison in my hand and I think positively saying that this is nectar will it stop killing people. It will not change its basic properties. What is the meaning of positive thinking? If on an intellectual level there are differences and is moving towards negative thinking, unnecessarily we have taken on this negative thinking, definitely you have to think positively there. But if at the roots there is negativity, garbage, ignorance how can you eradicate that with positive thinking. That is impossible. What does Baba want to say here? I would like to clear it with an example. Say there are two ill persons, both have cancer. Both go to a doctor. Doctor makes a mistake. He forgets to tell a person that he has cancer and he gives some medicines. He tells him to take the medicines regularly every morning, afternoon and evening. To the other person he tells him that he has 2nd stage cancer. He tells him of his disease, tells him of his ignorance and then he prescribes the medicines asking him to take them in the morning, afternoon and evening, who will take the medicines more diligently, you tell me? The one who knows the disease or the one who does not know of his disease? The one who knows will take it more diligently. It is all about this. The one who becomes aware of his ignorance he will take the medicines of karma Yog, Bhakti Yog, these are the medicines. Dhyan Yog, Gyan Yog. All the yogs that are there he will take the medicine with lot of faith and will do all the yogs every moment with awareness. He will follow his purpose, he will do sadhanas, with lot of awareness and lot of passion. The one who is not aware of his disease he may or may not take medicines, we can’t say. If the Doctor scares him that if he does not take medicines then he will die then he will take it with so much faith. He makes him aware of his ignorance that he is in 2nd stage. We should understand it this way. If I am enjoying 24 hours the ignorance, I have no awareness of it but I am trapped in my own imagination of release, liberation, bliss, Bhramagyan, atma gyan then they are just words.",
    "Description": "🔱 साईं बाबा और अज्ञान की आध्यात्मिक परतें | अध्याय 39 की गूढ़ व्याख्या | Sai Baba Satsang 🔱\n\n🕉 \"हम २४ घंटे अज्ञान में लिप्त रहते हैं, पर उस पर कभी चर्चा नहीं करते। लेकिन आत्मा, ब्रह्मज्ञान, मोक्ष जैसे कल्पनिक शब्दों में उलझे रहते हैं।\" — इस गूढ़ सत्संग में हम साईं सच्चरित्र के अध्याय ३९ में वर्णित भगवद गीता के श्लोक ४.३४ पर आधारित उस दिव्य संवाद को समझते हैं, जहाँ बाबा श्री नानासाहेब चाँदोरकर से 'ज्ञान' की नहीं, 'अज्ञान' की बात करते हैं।\n\n🌿 यह सत्संग हमारी आध्यात्मिक जिज्ञासा को झकझोरता है और बताता है कि केवल शब्दों का ज्ञान हमें मुक्त नहीं करता — मुक्ति तब मिलती है जब हम अपने भीतर के अज्ञान को पहचानते हैं, उस पर रोते हैं, और उससे निकलने की तड़प जगती है।\n\n🌞 मुख्य बिंदु:\n\nबाबा क्यों कहते हैं कि ज्ञान नहीं, बल्कि अज्ञान का उपदेश किया जाता है?\nआत्मा स्वयंभू है, इसे बनाया या नष्ट नहीं किया जा सकता — यह तो बस अज्ञान से ढकी है।\nसच्चा सद्गुरु वही है जो शिष्य को उसके अज्ञान से परिचित कराए और उसमें उससे बाहर निकलने की तड़प जगाए।\nजानकारी (Information) और अनुभवजन्य आत्मज्ञान (Experiential Knowledge) में क्या अंतर है?\nआत्ममंथन का महत्व — क्या हमारी आध्यात्मिकता सिर्फ विचारों की तृप्ति बन गई है?\n🌺 इस सत्संग में नानासाहेब की वह करुणामयी प्रार्थना भी उद्धृत की गई है (श्लोक १०१–१०४) जो अज्ञान की पीड़ा को आत्मा से निकली पुकार बनाकर बाबा के चरणों में समर्पित करती है।\n\n🙏 यह वीडियो उन सभी साधकों के लिए है जो सच्चे आत्मबोध की राह पर चलना चाहते हैं और जो अपने भीतर झाँकने का साहस रखते हैं।\n\n✨ Om Sai Ram | ॐ साईं राम ✨\n💫 \"ज्ञान की नहीं, अज्ञान की पहचान से ही आत्मा जागती है।\"\n📿 वीडियो पसंद आए तो Like, Share और Subscribe ज़रूर करें।\n🛎️ नई सत्संग शृंखला के लिए Bell Icon दबाना न भूलें।\n\n#SaiBabaSatsang #SaiCharitra #AdhyatmikGyan #AgyanAurGyan #SadguruKripa #SpiritualAwakening #BhagavadGita #OmSaiRam.     \n\n🔱 Sai Baba and the Spiritual Layers of Ignorance | Deep Commentary on Chapter 39 | Sai Baba Satsang 🔱\n🕉 “We spend 24 hours immersed in ignorance, yet never talk about it. Instead, we remain entangled in imaginary words like soul, self-realization, and liberation.” — In this profound satsang, we explore the divine dialogue from Chapter 39 of the Shri Sai Satcharitra, based on Bhagavad Gita verse 4.34, where Baba doesn’t speak to Nana Saheb Chandorkar about knowledge, but about ignorance.\n\n🌿 This satsang shakes our spiritual curiosity and reveals that mere intellectual knowledge doesn’t liberate us. True freedom begins when we recognize the layers of ignorance within, we cry over it, and awaken a deep yearning to rise above it.\n\n🌞 Key points covered:\n\nWhy does Baba say that it's not knowledge, but ignorance that must be preached?\nThe soul is self-existent; it cannot be created or destroyed — it is only covered by ignorance.\nA true Sadguru is one who introduces the disciple to their own ignorance and ignites the urge to break free from it.\nWhat is the difference between information and experiential self-knowledge?\nThe importance of self-inquiry — has our spirituality become just mental gratification?\n🌺 This satsang also includes the heartfelt prayer of Nana Saheb (verses 101–104), which expresses the pain of ignorance as a soul’s cry, surrendered at Baba’s feet.\n🙏 This video is for all sincere seekers who wish to walk the path of true self-awareness — and who have the courage to look within.\n\n✨ Om Sai Ram\n💫 “It is not knowledge, but the recognition of ignorance that awakens the soul.”\n\n📿 If you find value in this satsang, please Like, Share, and Subscribe.\n🛎️ Don’t forget to hit the Bell Icon for new satsang episodes.\n\n#SaiBabaSatsang #SaiCharitra #SpiritualWisdom #IgnoranceAndKnowledge #SadguruGrace #SelfAwakening #BhagavadGita #OmSaiRam …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, sai, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, sai songs, saiwani, sai baba songs, miracles, saibaba miracles, chamatkar",
    "Views": "7,760 views",
    "Likes": "406"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई बाबा कच्चे घडो से ही पानी भरकर बगीचे को क्यों सींचते थे ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i-RiCJKsKs8",
    "Transcript": "The devotee who aspires for renunciation(detachment) in their life should repeatedly read this chapter, the fifth chapter, which leads to attainment of renunciation. Om Sairam! In the fifth chapter of Shri Sai Satcharitra, there is a wonderful leela where Baba daily took two raw clay pots from Vaman Tatyaji. He would fill these pots with water and irrigate the garden. At night, the pots were left under neem tree, and by morning, they would burst, transforming into clay that merged with the earth. This ritual continued for three years and Once Vaman Tatyaji questioned baba why he preferred raw pots when he(vaman tatya) had sturdy ones baked in fire. But Baba's response was, \"I prefer the raw pots only.\" Today, we'll uncover the mystery behind Baba's affection for these raw pots in this episode. There's extraordinary significance of the fifth chapter. the devotee with earnest desire for renunciation in their life should repeatedly read this chapter. As you've narrated the leela, Baba would daily take two raw clay pots from Vaman Tatyaji to blossom the garden by fetching water in it One meaning of it comes out for symbolizing that devotees coming to Him are like raw pots, imperfect and with all the desires. He takes them and nurtures them spiritually, like tending a garden or blossoming flowers. On a deeper level, the act of taking the pots without payment signifies selfless service. Vaman Tatyaji, perhaps not having given attention to selfless service in previous lifetimes, and perhaps the Lord exhausted from teaching him would take that service as His right in this birth As Baba was omnipotent, in this birth, decides to take his service without payment, emphasizing the value of selfless devotion. The second interpretation of the leela also addresses the discrepancy between hearing about selfless service and practicing it. The leela beautifully illustrates how Baba, the Sadguru, interacts with those who may not fully embody the principle of selfless service. After filling the raw clay pots with water, he would pour the water and then place it under the neem tree. These pots would burst because they weren't baked in the fire. The underlying message was Baba's attempt to make us understand that considering our lives permanent is like those unbaked pots, here today but maybe gone tomorrow. so to keep the notion of life's uncertain nature alive he would buy raw pots. That do not live with the sentiment of life as permanent Who knows when death may come. So, Baba wanted us to realize that we are not invincible. And His way to make us realize is very terrifying, i don't know if you have experienced it or not but Sometime without any reason the fear of death haunts us. so by permeating this fear again and again He makes us realize about this fleeting nature of life Baba used the metaphor of unbaked pots to convey this. It's a terrifying experience, and if you have experienced it, you can understand. On one side, he engages in selfless service, diminishing the ego, and on the other side, he instills the fear of death, making us realize that I am not the body, but the soul. All of this is part of the leela indirectly the ultimate goal behind this is the awakening our consciousness. This is the main purpose and if we dive deeper into this chapter, we'll see it's just not only one leela in this chapter. It's like the raw clay pot is the earth, and when water is poured into it, after a while, the clay will transform into soil, and the water will assimilate the clay, realizing that the dominance of water over clay. In this chapter, Baba continues with another leela, lighting lamps with water. Through this leela, he conveys that the importance of fire is greater than water; it is subtle yet powerful. Now Moving on to Chapter 37, Baba alternate day goes to stay in the Chavadi, and as he leaves Dwarkamai that night, he extinguishes the lamp by swatting his hand. This leela signifies that air is more powerful than fire. Exploring the dominance of one element over another among the five elements, so 5th chapter is very deep considering different aspects Chapter 44, Baba is portrayed as lying lifeless for three days, resembling a dead body. There is no movement in his body – no pulsation, no breath, and no heartbeat. This scenario illustrates the element of space. When there is no movement of breath, the element of space is present. Baba rises after three days, indicating the experience of chidakasha, the awareness of universal consciousness. so in this way He has tried to exposite tatva gyan in different chapters The journey begins with raw clay pots and reaches the realm of the sky(chidakash) It demonstrates that the leela is not limited but profound, and it journeys from clay to chidakasha. The leela holds extraordinary importance. The essence of this leela first lesson - that this manifest world is created from the five elements. In this leela, it is explained that water is more subtle than earth, is not only more powerful but also more pervasive. This is the unchanging secret of elemental knowledge: the more subtle something is, the more expansive and powerful it becomes. Water is more subtle than Earth. Fire is more subtle than water. Air is subtle than fire. And sky(space)is more subtle than air. The human body is designed for the exploration of the subtle from the gross physical body to the subtle senses, from the senses to the subtle mind, from the mind to the subtle intellect, and from the intellect to the subtle soul. The mystery of this leela lies in traversing the journey from the earth to the sky and from the gross body to the subtle soul. Now, the second and essential lesson from this divine play is Baba seemingly telling us that he has sent us into this world as a flute. This flute must undergo the divine fire of tapasya before it breaks and melts transforming into the subtlest air, merging with the infinite consciousness. Only then will you become the self-resounding Brahma This is when life becomes meaningful, and the raw clay pot, transforms into the permanent vessel , the soul.",
    "Description": "✨Adhyay 5 (Ovi 46-51)✨\n\"A subtle journey through the five great elements.\"\nIn this spiritually rich episode, we explore the profound symbolism behind the Leela of the raw earthen pots as narrated in the Shri Sai Satcharitra. Shri Krishnaji unveils the deeper meaning of why Sai Baba would take raw pots from Vaman Tatya without offering a single penny in return, and what this unusual act truly signifies.\n✨Why would Baba keep those pots under a tree, only for them to eventually burst?\n✨How does this simple yet divine act convey deep spiritual truths about our inner elements—earth, water, fire, air, and space?\nWith loving devotion and sharp insight, Shri Krishnaji explains how these raw pots reflect the human condition—and how Sai Baba gently guides us towards inner ripening.\nFor those drawn to Baba’s mystical path, this video opens the door to the profound insights hidden within the sacred verses of the Sai Satcharitra.\n🙏🏻Om Sai Ram🙏🏻\n\n---------------------\n0:00 Introduction\n0:39 Story of the raw pots\n1:50 Significance of the raw pots: Sakaam Bhakt\n2:58 Selfless service\n4:25 Life's uncertain nature\n6:55 Dominance of one element over other\n9:28 Essence of the Leela\n----------------------\n\n✨अध्याय ५ (ओवी ४६-५१)✨\n\"पंचमहाभूतों की एक सूक्ष्म यात्रा\" \nइस आध्यात्मिक रूप से समृद्ध प्रसंग में, हम श्री साईं सच्चरित्र  में वर्णित \"कच्चे घड़े\" की लीला के गहरे प्रतीकात्मक अर्थों का अन्वेषण करते हैं।\nश्री कृष्णाजी इस लीला के पीछे छिपे गूढ़ संदेशों को उजागर करते हैं—कि साईं बाबा वामन तात्या से बिना एक भी पैसा दिए कच्चे घड़े क्यों लिया करते थे, और इस असामान्य व्यवहार का वास्तविक अर्थ क्या है?\n✨बाबा घड़े को वृक्ष के नीचे क्यों रखते थे?\n✨कैसे यह साधारण-सा दिखने वाला लेकिन दिव्य कार्य हमारे भीतर के पंचमहाभूत—पृथ्वी, जल, अग्नि, वायु और आकाश—से जुड़े गहरे आध्यात्मिक सत्य को प्रकट करता है?\nश्री कृष्णाजी प्रेमपूर्ण भक्ति और सूक्ष्म दृष्टि से बताते हैं कि ये कच्चे घड़े वास्तव में मानव अवस्था का प्रतिबिंब हैं—और कैसे साईं बाबा हमें आंतरिक परिपक्वता की ओर मार्गदर्शन करते हैं।\nजो भी भक्त बाबा के रहस्यमय मार्ग की ओर आकर्षित हैं, उनके लिए यह वीडियो श्री साईं सच्चरित्र में छिपे गूढ़ ज्ञान के द्वार खोलता है।\n🙏🏻ॐ साईं राम🙏🏻\n\n#saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #shirdisaibaba #saisatcharitra #spiritualism #millennials #saileela #saibabateachings #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #youtube #shraddha #saburi #spiritualwisdom #krishnaji #bhaktipath #vedanticwisdom #rawpots #innerjourney  #divinegrace #saikripa #saidevotees #saispiritualtalk #corespirituality #saileelarahasya #trending #like #comment #share #explore …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "4,854 views",
    "Likes": "335"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई को कुए में उल्टा लटकाने का रहस्य",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eQDsyfL80Wg",
    "Transcript": "Words of Sai himself is more valuable than elixir of life. chapter 50 of shree sai sathcharitra verse number 178 Definition of fake people. This world is a market place of Maya,here there are boundless real and fake things Many are the customers here, who buy the fake, mistaking them for real. Fake people will not be a part of us and Real will never depart from today on my will shall not prevail baba your will shall prevail. First i will try to know what your will is. what you want to say through the leela of every chapter of satcharitra To know your will i ll read Sai satcharitra from today. I won't spent any day without reading it. I would listen it, contemplate it and meditate on it and i would first understand the depth of leela in a way you want me to know we all read Sai satcharitra and we all find the description about the necessity of Guru in life in chapter 2nd of it we must talk more about our Sadguru Sainath Maharaj to subtly know know Him and therefore in this particular show we will listen to many wise individuals who will present the life teachings of Sai baba in front of you Hail Lord Sai. I, vina dighe, welcome you, our audience, with warm heart. Today's our special guest on this special show is Krishnaji. Jai Sairam krishanji i welcome you on behalf of SaiLeela tv and our audience. in a 32nd chapter we get to know that Baba is tied up head down over a well and coming to normal says that he felt happiness so what is this leela about. look to understand this leela first of all the decree of world; the worldly notion should fall down like baba surrendered himself, saying that He is ready to do whatever guru says and than baba's guru has taken Him suspending him up head down, not before that Belief in Guru and his wish is formed that from today onward guru's wish will be done Sai, i have surrender my self to you. Grant me joy or sorrow as per your will\" so with this clarity sheltered at Sadguru's feet but impressions from last births are still lingering that needs to be washed. both are different. Firstly there was no refuge towards Guru. Desires, distortions and ignorance had filled and moreover refuge was also not apparent. so at this stage my refuge towards guru is steadfast that from today on my will shall not prevail baba your will shall prevail. First i will try to know what your will is. what you want to say through the leela of every chapter of satcharitra and to know your will i ll read Sai satcharitra from today. i won't spent any day without reading it. I would listen it, contemplate it and meditate on it and i would first understand the depth of leela in a way you want me to know and will try excessively to walk according to it. This is called surrender to Guru. which Baba offered to his guru. Although he don't need a guru nor is there a need for him to create this divine play, as he is a universal being but still he descends to create this leela with a purpose to make us understand the depth of it. so Baba wanted to say that he has completed one aspect of surrendering the guru now after getting into the hands of guru the second aspect - the impressions of many lifetimes, the darkness, ignorance, worldly attachments and desires ought to be fallen as if doctor has only taken me into operation theater, operation is yet to commence i have learned about the disease that i m suffering with fatal disease and found the best doctor to treat now is the process Operation in the operation theater is remaining which is the act of suspending up head down This is the activity. He completely mix up the things. All worldly attachments, all our desires are expelled, vomited out of us with the inversion of head. and that process is extremely excruciating. I m saying this with experience and the person who shows faith and patience there and firmly holds the belief, but baba never let the faith waver because he is the one securing the legs to the tree. As they are tied by him inspite of gong through such opposite circumstances the person never separates from the faith It is his boundless compassion while the process is completely reverse because till i received Sadguru's refuge i was incomplete I wanted to devout my Guru with worldly desires rather for desires and now he has put me onto the track where i need to eliminate my desires He has taken me on operation table. Now He will operate. therefore in 32nd chapter of Sai satcharitra he says, \"isna trishna cha panya cha satha\" meaning there is a well with water and baba is tied up side down over the well and that water Drinking that water is far away, as he is unable to reach it. And the water is described as a water of ishna (divine desires) and trishna (worldly desires) Om Sai Ram, chapter 32 verse 24 anarthatmak ha thayiyacha avidepoti janm yacha ishatrushnadi paniyacha satha tyacha sabovati which means this tree of life is disastrous by its very nature because it is born of ignorance and this tree of ignorance is sustaining by drinking the water of intense desires and cravings that means he is oriented towards the desires, pleasures, attachments of the world but prevented from touching it not allowed to touch or drink because more this water you get i.e more your desires are fulfilled more it will get accumulated in you even if you take birth on birth these desires won't end and what baba did is to tie up side down meaning in a way if we see that he made against the desires of world with certainty i can say when all the audience listening will read this leela of 32nd chapter then they would understand deeply what baba wants to say till now we just wander through words Devotees like me will say, not a devotee rather a lineage we are just a lineage walking on the path. Would you like present such talk about leelas? I also want to add to this that when He takes on the operation table many times situation arises where faith can be shattered because he tests so much that there is no limit to it, imagine the desires with which i lived many lives, on which my every breathe would sustain and today if i have been kept in a situation opposite to it then what could be our state just imagine but look at his compassion he prohibits us from touching water And when all the garbage inside was completely dusted off, all the wishes inside were erased, now I am not getting that water till date, I am not getting it, I kept dying by doing it, when such a time comes, Master, I understood that this water It is dangerous. Just as a person in this world needs water to survive, similarly the entire universe as it exists lives on the basis of desires. As he has said about the tree that the world is like a tree, the tree grows on whose strength it is on the strength of water, similarly this whole universe which exists, if there is life behind it, if there is water behind it on the basis of which it is alive. Those are wishes and desires. So, to remove the desires, they keep away from the water all the filth that is there, first they clean it completely by taking it on the operation table and turning it upside down means all the filth that is lying inside All the garbage like instincts, ego, pride, greed, sense of I, wisdom, Anger, attachment, partiality etc. gets completely cleaned There comes a time when the man himself says that now it has nothing to do with water. Lord, why did you give me so much trouble? Why did you do this operation on me? Today every pore of my body has become known. Earlier there was pain when he was crucified, he cried, wailed and shouted, Baba, what are you doing? Where are you taking me? Why did you hang it upside down? Are you taking me on the wrong path? Because some verses comes in Sai Satcharitra chalu jata kathilya vate arambhi arambhi god vatemag jethe tethe pasartil sarate katech kate chohi kade Then in that state the person screams and shouts, then a doubt comes in the mind that where are they being taken after hanging upside down. I wanted your devotion but you are killing me. But in reality, dying is life. Those who die at their hands attain the life of immortality where there will be no death again. And when nature kills us, when Maya kills us, just like it kills every human being, death comes whenever nature kills us, then he is reborn. He will be born again carrying the thirst and desire of the entire world. But when Sadhguru hangs him upside down, sadguru kills him When he hits/kills, there is no retaliatory instinct. There is no rebirth. Rather, all the filth gets washed away and that person becomes the hero of the universe like him. That's why the time Baba has to keep in that stage may be twelve years, some may take sixteen years, some may take twenty-four years, I can also tell you that he will wash as much as he gives him a chance. It depends. Because preparation has been shown at the feet of your Guru. But the rest is this process. This is the process of removing dirt and the process of operation, it is the treatment of disease. One has to go through that pain. An operation lasts a long time. The operation time on the operation table is a maximum of twelve hours but this is twelve years , twenty-four years. One can take one penance.i.e. twelve years .two penances But the person who continues to suffer, continues to suffer, he screams in pain, but as time passes, he starts to realize that no, Baba, whatever he is doing is right because the filth inside me is not going to go away Unless he takes me away through this operation. Then when Baba realizes that right now there is no lust, no vices, no ego left in him, then now he does not need to hang upside down, the operation has been completed and Baba comes running, it is written like this. He comes running and takes out his leg and makes him stand and then he asks the disciple, how did you like the process through which I took you? Now what answer will a true devotee give?.He says that Baba, I cannot describe in words the joy that I felt during the process. It is beyond description. It is natural, after removing so much dirt filth, what will he say after getting light?. That a fool like me cannot describe that feeling. And I don't have words to express how capable you are and what a favor you have done to me by doing that operation. I believe that no other leela can be bigger than this. There can be no greater depth than this. That is why a guru yearns so much for his disciple. How much night and day follows him. How true is their thirst and tell me what their thirst is. The state I have reached, just as I am the hero of the universe, this disciple of mine should also become the hero of the universe. It is the Sadguru that makes the Sadguru, not just the disciple. Just like baba has done sadguru Upasani Maharaj. It is such a long process, that is why there is a couplet of Kabirji on it. Satguru ki mahima Anant kiya upkaar lochan anant ughariya anant dikhavat haar What did they give me after such a long process? So Kabirji is saying that the glory of Sadhguru is infinite. He has done me infinite favors. Even if I spend crores of lives in debt and serve him, I will still not be able to repay that debt. It Is impossible. I will be indebted forever. Sadhguru opened the eyes of infinite knowledge within me. Open not just one but infinite knowledge . Meaning, you can't even count, you have opened so many eyes of knowledge. Every pore of my being was filled with the eyes of knowledge and I could see the infinite. After receiving that experience and after hanging the man upside down, Baba straightens him and asks, Tell me how did you feel? After receiving so much favor and after getting so much experience, what will be his answer? Then he will say that after going through this process, what I experienced, the knowledge, the light that I saw, Baba, I have no words to describe it because a fool like me cannot describe it. So after saying that, this leela ends there. Thank you sir. You came and Jai Shri Sai",
    "Description": "In this sacred discourse, we immerse ourselves in the divine leelas of Shree Sai Baba as narrated in the Sai Satcharitra, with a special focus on Chapter 32. Our esteemed guest, Krishnaji, unveils the profound spiritual significance behind Baba being suspended upside down over a well—a divine symbol of total surrender to the Sadguru and the arduous process of purification from worldly desires.\n\nThis episode beautifully illuminates the path of surrender, the transformative grace of the Guru, and the spiritual surgery that cleanses the soul of ignorance, ego, and attachments. It is through this divine operation that the disciple transcends the cycle of birth and death, awakening to infinite knowledge and eternal bliss.\n\nMay this sacred sharing inspire all seekers to deepen their faith, embrace patience in trials, and experience the boundless compassion of Sai Baba, the eternal Sadguru.\n\nHindi Description:\n\nइस पावन प्रवचन में हम श्री साईं बाबा के दिव्य लीलों में डूबते हैं, विशेषकर साई सत्चरित्र के अध्याय 32 के माध्यम से। हमारे श्रद्धेय अतिथि कृष्णाजी जी के द्वारा, हम समझते हैं कि बाबा का कुएं के ऊपर उल्टा बंधा जाना क्या आध्यात्मिक अर्थ रखता है—यह गुरु के प्रति पूर्ण समर्पण और सांसारिक वासनाओं से शुद्धि का दिव्य प्रतीक है।\n\nयह कथा गुरु की अनंत कृपा, आत्मा की सफाई का तीव्र और परिवर्तनकारी प्रक्रिया, और अज्ञान, अहंकार और बंधनों से मुक्त होने का मार्ग दर्शाती है। इसी पवित्र शल्य चिकित्सा से शिष्य जन्म-मरण के चक्र से ऊपर उठकर अनंत ज्ञान और अमर आनंद का अनुभव करता है।\n\nयह दिव्य साक्षात्कार सभी साधकों के लिए प्रेरणा बने कि वे विश्वास को प्रगाढ़ करें, कठिनाइयों में धैर्य रखें और साईं बाबा की अनंत करुणा का अनुभव प्राप्त करें।\n\nDivine Timestamps / पावन समय सारणी:\n0:01 – Sai Baba’s sacred words: Priceless like the elixir of immortality\n0:08 – Divine reference: Chapter 50, Verse 178 of Sai Satcharitra\n0:15 – The illusion of Maya: The world’s marketplace of truth and falsehood\n0:29 – Discernment of the real and the unreal in life’s journey\n0:54 – The soul’s pledge: “Not my will, Baba’s will alone shall prevail”\n1:08 – A heartfelt vow to read, meditate, and imbibe the sacred Satcharitra daily\n1:54 – The indispensable grace of Sadguru, revealed in Chapter 2\n2:48 – Introducing our venerable guest, Krishnaji—devotee and spiritual guide\n3:04 – Unfolding the mystic leela of Baba suspended head down over a well\n4:03 – The sacred act of surrender to the Guru’s divine will\n5:30 – The cosmic leela of surrender and the purpose behind the divine play\n6:21 – Spiritual surgery: Purification from desires, ego, and attachments\n7:12 – Enduring the divine pain with unwavering faith and devotion\n8:13 – The symbolic well: Water of divine and worldly desires beyond reach\n9:48 – The soul’s struggle against binding cravings and attachments\n10:12 – Suspension as a metaphor: Turning the world upside down within\n11:04 – The Guru’s testing of faith through trials and purification\n12:17 – Transcending desires: The true freedom of the surrendered soul\n13:03 – Cleansing the inner impurities: ego, anger, pride, greed, and attachment\n13:46 – The seeker’s turmoil, questions, and eventual surrender\n14:17 – Death by nature versus the transformative ‘death’ by Sadguru’s grace\n15:12 – The length and depth of spiritual operation and penance\n16:16 – Realization of the Guru’s loving purpose amid suffering\n16:49 – The joyous dawn after spiritual cleansing and rebirth\n17:47 – The sacred bond: Sadguru creating the hero within the disciple\n18:28 – Kabir’s couplet: The infinite grace and boundless kindness of Sadguru\n19:08 – Eternal indebtedness to the Guru’s divine grace\n19:21 – Awakening infinite wisdom through the Sadguru’s blessings\n19:51 – The devotee’s wordless ecstasy upon divine enlightenment\n20:09 – Closing blessings and gratitude …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "9,369 views",
    "Likes": "556"
  },
  {
    "Title": "स्वयं साई वाणी \"ध्यान\" किसे कहते है ? / Dhyan",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YQayimAT3do",
    "Transcript": ". I am repeating, as on today all the meditative techniques that are given with that your mind can be put to sleep, it does not have the strength to change the mind. After so many hours you wake up, open your eyes, you will wake up with those many desires when you had gone to sleep Then what is the use of that meditation? Om Sai Ram. The topic I am taking up now is what is true meditation? Because now a days everyone is taking about meditation. Every institution, talks about meditation. If there is no mediation in life then such a person is not spiritual, this is the perception of many people and there is lot of talk about meditation. Now a days the amount of stress a person undergoes, the amount of stress a person takes on his head, that there is some peace of mind this day, some control over mind so some meditation is also required. That is why today there are many institutes which talk about meditation techniques. This is our way of doing meditation, you have that way of doing meditation. We have been told to meditate in this way. Some other institute, some other Guru he says no we have been told this is the way of meditating. The question is what is true meditation? What is meditation? What does Baba say about meditation. What does Baba feel about meditation, for us that is more important. Today I will take 7/8 verses and what is meditation will open up. What does Baba say about meditation? What is the importance of meditation? First verse Adhyay 19 Verse 33 Gyanahunahi shresta dhyana, Arjunalagi kathi Bhagwan. Tutavaya bhaktbhavbandhan, Saihi sadhan he vade. Gyanahunahi shresta dhyana - Meditation is superior to knowledge. Arjunalagi kathi Bhagwan – Arjun, remember that mediation is crores times more important than knowledge because the attachments of the devotees drop. Baba is also confirming this. That mediation is better than knowledge. This is the first verse. Second Verse Adhyay 19 Verse 126 Mahatve gyana paris dhyana means the importance of meditation is many times more than knowledge. Tadarth lage yatarth gyana – but to do that meditation must have precise knowledge. The depth of that meditation has to be fully absorbed by my heart. The universal object soul, I am going to meditate upon, what is the nature of that soul, what is the actual nature of the brahman. It is Satchidananda. What is Sat, what is chitta and what is Ananda? So first, the thing I want to mediate upon I must have complete knowledge of that in my mind. Means first knowledge has to be there of the thing I will meditate upon only then I will be able to meditate upon it properly. Mahatve gyana paris dhyana, Tadarth lage yatarth gyana, Hota na vastuche sadyant akalan – here vastu means brahma vastu. Hota na vastuche sa adi anant akalan means my wisdom has to have the capability to grasp the universe. When I will have that capability to grasp fully then a picture will get clear in my intellect, through knowledge that picture will happen and I will, after taking the support of that knowledge be able to meditate on it. This is what Baba says about meditation. This was the second verse. So, first he has said that having knowledge of soul and Brahma is essential so that the form settles in your mind and then you can meditate on that. Now when you will be able to meditate, he is giving an answer to that. When you will get the capability to meditate like that, he gives an answer to that in this verse. Adhyay 19 verse 106 Houni sarveshnavinirmukta, Dhyna anava sarvabhutasth. Dhyan hoil vyavasthit, Pratavya prapt hoil. See he has put a condition Houni sarveshnavinirmuktahe has spoken of three desires – Popularity, progeny, wealth. First of all, there should be no desire for progeny. It means that for the family, there has to be love but no attachment. There is a big difference between love and attachment. If, there is attachment then you are trapped in the desire for progeny. This is one desire, Putreshna – desire for progeny. Vitteshna (desire for wealth) -There should be no greed for money, that my life will have happiness if I have lots of money. If this feeling is there that I will get happiness from money, then you are mistaken. You can never get happiness from money. I will give an example. Dhirubhai Ambani’s one side was paralyzed. And Dhirubhai Ambani ranked seventh in the list of the 10 wealthiest persons in the world. It means that Dhirubhai Ambani’s name was included in the list of all the wealthiest people in the world. He got Paralysis. He had so much money that he got treatment in the country and abroad in America, UK, Japan and everywhere else. He spent so much money but, in the end, he died of the same disease. So, to think that if I have a lot money then I will be happy, there can be no greater stupidity then this. So, this is Vitteshna (Desire for wealth). Putreshna (Desire for progeny), Vitteshna (desire for wealth) and third is Lokeshna (desire for popularity). Hunger for name and fame. I should become famous, that I also have a position, people recognize me, if there is hunger for this, that people appreciate me, if I get down from the car then someone comes and opens the door for me and stands respectfully so that I can get down, I should hold such a position in the world. If you have such feelings then you have disease named lokeshna (desire for popularity). So, these are Sarveshnas, the three desires. There should be no Putreshna (Desire for progeny), Vitteshna (desire for wealth) and lokeshna (desire for popularity). The day when all these three desires drop then that which is everywhere, Brahmavastu, that which is present in every particle, which is in the form of Satchidanand, you will be able to meditate on that. It means if the three desires are not dropped, then you can take crores of rebirths and study meditation but cannot meditate. So, Baba has put the condition Houni sarveshnavinirmukta, Dhyna anava sarvabhutasth, Dhyan hoil vyavasthit, Pratavya prapt hoil. Then you will be able to do actual meditation. But all the desires are still there. Not even one desire has dropped but some Guru comes and gives us a technique saying meditate like this then that is pretention of meditation., it is not meditation. How will meditation happen. The desires have not dropped and Baba has put in a condition here, Houni sarveshnavinirmukta, Dhyna anava sarvabhutasth, Dhyan hoil vyavasthit. But today is Kaliyug. Duplicate things sell a lot. People who talk about duplicate things are more than the people who are listening to duplicate things. The one listening and the one telling both are duplicate. How will meditation happen. It's a very important topic. Often people ask me why Baba has not spoken about meditation technique. One Guru is teaching this meditation, the other Guru is teaching that meditation, now I will not take names. I do not want to fall in that. Then why Baba did not give us some meditation technique? Baba has also given. I will come to that. But first Baba speaks about what actually meditation is. The technique that is being told to you; your consciousness is being put to rest for a while. The way a person gets intoxicated after drinking alcohol similarly you are made to feel intoxicated for a while, you become unconscious for awhile and you feel a little light and you feel that you have meditated. The technique is like intoxication which one gets after having intoxicated drinks, the inebriation that happens is fake With that ignorance does not disappear. All the meditation techniques in the world can put you for a while in hypnotic state, for a while it can put your mind to sleep but cannot change it. I am repeating, as on today all the meditative techniques that are given with that your mind can be put to sleep, it does not have the strength to change the mind. After so many hours you wake up, open your eyes, you will wake up with those many desires when you had gone to sleep Then what is the use of that meditation? So, baba has cleared it in this verse Houni sarveshnavinirmukta, Dhyna anava sarvabhutasth, Dhyan hoil vyavasthit, Pratavya prapt hoil. Then you will get that good thing in your hand and you will realize Brahma. Now 4th Verse, Adhyay 17 Verse 76 Chittashudhi jahalyavin, Parmarthi righu pahe jo apan. Gyangarvachi ti mirvan, kaval shin to khara. This is one more whip from Baba. Chittashudhi jahalyavin - till such time your mind is purified, Parmarthi righu pahe jo apan – if you try to enter spirituality without purifying the mind, Gyangarvachi ti mirvan – it will be only ego, kaval shin to khara and such a meditation if you do for crores of years by taking crores of birth, you get nothing in your hands except for betrayal. He put one more condition, the mind has to be pure for doing true meditation. Without purification of the mind, you cannot do meditation, at the most you can say that you have been given a technique and you are studying meditation. Max to max you can say that. But you have no right to say that I am meditating. I will take one more Verse. Adhyay 19 Verse 32 and the sequence in which I am taking the verses you have to take it in that way then you will know how Baba opens up meditation. In between I got Adhyay 17 now I return to Adhyay 19. Mahnuni Sai dayaghan, bahudha nij shishyalagun. Bhakti ani namsmaran, yachech vivaran karit. Baba knows that without purification of the mind, meditation is not possible. If the mind is not purified in this person that is why oh person do not leave devotion and remembrance of God. do shun 9 fold devotion and remembrance of god So, he says Mahnuni Sai dayaghan, With compassion he says to all the devotees. bahudha nij shishyalagun – he used to tell his disciples do not get into the trouble of meditation yet because you will get duplicate thing in your hand, then devotion and remembrance will be left. The study of IAS, the books for IAS will be given after you clear the entrance, first pass SSC. We will speak about IAS later. Will talk of meditation, dharana and samadhi later. So, he says Mahnuni Sai dayaghan, bahudha nij shishyalagun, Bhakti ani namsmaran, yachech vivaran karit. For us if there is any meditation then it is 9 ways of devotion and unbroken remembrance of God. There is no intention of reducing the importance of meditation by me or Baba. Baba also wants that in our life too meditation is brought in. But at the right time and with the right person then it has value otherwise it is valueless is what it says. Nothing is said against meditation but he tells what duplicate meditation is. N Now one more Adhyay. Adhyay 16 Verse 167 Mal-vikshep ani avaran, aise tridoshi antahkaran. Nishkam karme mal-nirmulan, vikshep-shalan upasana. Now here he is coming further down. He has brought us to SSC. He was talking about IAS and he brought us to SSC in this Verse. He says that your mind is full of three flaws, mal, vikshep and avaran. These are the three flaws of Antahkaran. Mal means impurity of the mind, dirtiness, desires, anger, greed, attachment, ego, jealousy, word, form, smell, touch, pride, all type of ignorance is mal. Vikshep means fickleness of the mind and third is Avaran. I am present in every particle inspite of that I think of myself as this body, I have covered myself with this body and this the third flaw Avaran. Aise tridoshi antahkaran – we all have these three flaws. Nishkam karme mal-nirmulan – so the dirt that we have within us will go away with Nishkam Karma, selfless karma. Now he has brought us to SSC level. We went straight to IAS, meditation, meditation, meditation, He say that this dirt will go away with nishkaam karmayog. Nishkam karme mal-nirmulan, vikshep-shalan upasana. And the Vikshep the wavering mind will go away with upasana (worship), devotion, remembrance of God, 9 ways of devotion. Means with Nishkam Karmayog the filth will go away and Vikshep (wavering mind) goes away with 9 ways of devotion and remembrance of God. When mal and Vikshep, both go away, purification of mind happens, then you are able to enter meditation. Baba is telling us how will we reach to meditation. First you have to do nishkam karmayog by which the flaws will be purified, the mind will be purified. Then worship, devotion, remembrance of God. You have to immerse yourself in 9 ways of devotion, then the wavering mind will go away. When both impurity of mind and fickleness of mind are erased, mind becomes steady now it is ready to meditate. Before that meditation is impossible. So whatever techniques of the false Gurus are, please don’t fall in their trap ever. What Baba says is the Ultimate truth, that is the Vedantic secret, that is the essence of the Upanishads. He never talks about letting anyone climb up a beanstalk. Get the pure approach which comes out from the roots, climbs up step by step, he talks of that path. Baba will never mislead you. He will never do it. This was Adhyay 16, Verse 167. Now the 7th verse. Adhyay 6 Verse 15. Karma gyan yog bhakti, ya chaumargi ishwarprapti. Jari hi char chaubaju nighati, tarihi pouchviti nijtaya. He has not spoken only about meditation. Karma Yog, Gyan Yog, Dhyan Yog and Bhakti Yog, all these 4 Yogs looks as though they are going in different directions all these four look like different paths but at the end they reach to the same destination. Many people make a big mistake by interpreting this verse as that these four leads to different paths, you catch hold of even one and you will attain to the whole. No, all four are required. A person has to live Nishkam karma Yog, he has to be an expert in Bhakti Yog, Gyan Yog and in the end also in Dhyan Yog, then he will be able to attain to the complete Brahma. Those people who say that catch hold of anyone from the four then you will reach that destination is false. What did we see in the earlier Verse. We have three flaws within us. We have impurity that is why Karma Yog is required, it is disease and the medicine is Karma Yog, so karma Yog is required. Vikshep, the fickleness of the mind and for that Upasana Bhakti Yog is required. For Avaran Gyan Yog is required and after all this the Satchidanand form within us start reflecting in our mind, that much preparation of the mind is done and after that on that Satchidanand form you will be able to focus your meditation upon. That is true meditation. And then Baba at the end says, once again in Adhyay 19 Verse 120 – Baba vadati katha Shravan first read these stories, kara manan ani nidhidhyasan – contemplate on these stories, why did baba do these leelas, what is he trying to teach me, what is the secret behind this leela and by doing this consistently our ignorance will be erased. Hoil smaran ani dhyan – With all your heart understand each and every word of this Sai Satcharitra, with devotion you read it then minutes that you give for every Adhyay that is meditation, he states this at the end. Baba vadati katha Shravan, kara manan ani nidhidhyasan. Hoil smaran ani dhyan, Anandghan Prakatel. And in this way the cloud of happiness in your life will appear. For the devotees of Sai Baba, that Satchidananda form meditation which for us is difficult, he has given us this spiritual book in the form of meditation, it is 8 years old child. If in one Adhyay we are able to immerse ourselves then it is meditation only. It is not even an iota less than meditation. When you sit with this spiritual book then understand that you will be sitting for meditation for 45 minutes. Keep this feeling within. Let the mind concentrate, focus and when tears drop while reading then understand that your meditation is accepted. This is meditation. The entire Adhyay 19 deals with this topic only along with Shraddha and Saburi. Baba has spoken more on meditation. The second half of Adhyay 19 is on this only. Normally we are not able to notice it, we are not able to understand it. In the whole Adhyay 19 there is only one small leela there are no much leelas in this Adhyay. The leela is that once Baba was standing near the house of Vamanrao Gondkar. Baba was very old that time and this was towards the end of his life, people used to hold him up by his two shoulders but it was difficult for him to get up. Two people used to hold his hands for him to walk but it was difficult for him to walk, this was baba’s state at the age of 80. It is the Leela of that time. It is very essential to tell this. After deep contemplation on meditation, why did Baba keep this Leela in Sai Satcharitra. It is a very important incident. Listen carefully. It is in the afternoon, first of all he is 80 years old and he is so weak that he is unable to get up by himself, could not walk on his own, such was his state and it is in the heat of April or May month, in the afternoon. He goes to Vaman Gondkar’s house and says go and get a ladder. A person gets a ladder and puts it on Vaman Gondkar’s house. Then Baba tells the two people to get out of his way He could not even walk when two people held him, that Baba climbs up the ladder. Now you can imagine how difficult it must have been to balance himself Just imagine. Even then he climbs up on his own, crosses Vaman Gondkar’s house and next to his house is Radhakrishna Mai’s house, that house also he crosses and then he tells the ladder man to get the ladder there. The ladder is put up there and with the same balance he gets down in that state. What does this Leela say. And Baba gives the ladder man Rs 2/- and we all know that Baba says that nobody’s labour should be taken free of cost. That is the essence of the Leela. But what does this Leela want to tell? After all the talks on knowledge and meditation what was the need for this Leela. Baba wanted to say that in the midst of meditation you should not miss out on karma Yog. I, inspite of being in such a bad state, Radhakrishna Mai’s fever had to be cured which had gone to her head and to do that I had to take this effort and by doing so her fever could be cured. So if I could take so much effort at this age hen how much effort you need to take to reach to this meditation is what he wants to tell. Only on intellectual level you have heard something, felt something, someone pumped up a little and we sat for meditation, it is not possible. Through this Leela baba tells that Nishkam Karma Yog with all that weakness and someone’s fever has gone to head and that if I could bring it down than I have to take that much effort. I have to take that trouble and after that Radhakrishna Mai’s fever will come down, he saw that and he took that much risk and he accomplished that feat. Those who live such a life only they will reach to Dhyana, Dharana, Samadhi is what he wants to tell. This is true meditation. I hope that after this there will remain no questions on meditations and don’t get cheated by other people. This world is market of illusions, there is no dearth of true and false things, taking false things as true, there are many such customers. This is the way of the world, duplicate things sell more, so don’t get cheated. As per Baba what original meditation is, is this.",
    "Description": "स्वयं साई वाणी \"ध्यान\" किसे कहते है ? / Dhyan …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, saipooja, Saili Sagar, dhyaan, dhyan, sai dhayn, sai dhyaan",
    "Views": "19,920 views",
    "Likes": "765"
  },
  {
    "Title": "नारायणगांव-जुन्नर सत्संग माँ लक्ष्मी की प्रार्थना",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=947DLsPpH2Y",
    "Transcript": "Sai baba's nectar of teaching SHREE SAI SATHCHARIT chapter 8 verse 112 Fakiri is a true kingship. Fakiri is everlasting and transient are riches either that riches would live you or you would die leaving it behind such were baba's constant words I have made a resolution that we will go to Shirdi for parikrama every 2nd week of the month till 9 months. So last time many people convinced me that Ghatasthapana is to be held on the 15th, so please postpone it by a week. So thought keeping their feelings, I canceled it and pushed it forward by a week. Meaning we went on the 22nd. And this time too few devotees are saying that 2nd Sunday is coming on the day of Diwali. they wish to postpone the parikrama date. I disagreed with the same. If you want to come then you have to come on the day of Diwali. Either Sai Baba or Lakshmiji. When we say that Thirty-Three crore gods and goddesses reside at the feet of Sadhguru, then Lakshmi ji is not counted, is she? Tatpara tuzya ya je dhyani. Akshaya tyanche sadani Lakshmi vasakari dinarajani. Rakhsisi sankata varuni Aisa yei ba . What does this mean ? Baba, the one who meditates on you every moment, the one who is engrossed in pure devotion, does not see anyone else except your devotion. Tatpara tuzya ya je dhyani. Akshaya tyanche sadani It does not mean that Maa Lakshmi resides in their house today but not after 2 years. Eternally (akshay) It is being said that Lakshmi will stay in their house and serve you like a hostess day and night. She will serve you is been said because that person serves the feet of Sadguru. So Lakshmi is compelled to become that man's Hostess. i will tell one more thing the one who serves Sadguru garners vairagy laxmi (disspation) not bhog laxmi (indulgence) Bhog Lakshmi or elusive Lakshmi is different. If Lakshmi comes into the life of one who does not have the light of Sadhguru, then she is illusive. She has come to drown. She has to fill you with ego. She has come to get things done that shouldn't be done. But if you are in the light of Sadhguru and Lakshmi has come then she is auspicious Lakshmi. She has come for welfare. So there is a big difference. like the difference between earth and sky. so just decide whether you want to come shirdi in laxmi poojan or not i leave it onto you Let me ask you a question, is Goddess Lakshmi pleased by your pleasantness or by your hard work? Of Course hard work. Not with pleasantries. If She is willing to be pleased by flattery then she is superficial How can she be a goddess? She Is satisfied with hard work. Your sweat doesn't even fall on the ground and before you she stands there with money and gives in your hand. That is Maa lakshmi. someone who can be pleased with flattery cannot be a goddess; she is rather illusionary And the elusive Lakshmi should not come. Vairagya (Dispassion) Lakshmi should come. Lakshmi who immerses in pleasures and luxuries is not needed. This much prayer should be made that Mother, if the religious mind is awakened within me and if I have the ability to use your money in good deeds, then only give me in abundance. And if you see that I am not capable, then keep me poor throughout my life, mother, but do not enter my house, my heart. So if my thoughts really touch your heart then I will wait for you all on the day of Lakshmi Puja in Shirdi. 12th November. Because once I have agreed for Dussehra, people thought that I would agree this time too. Now that's enough. Now either Lakshmi or Sai Baba. And the reality is that when I use Goddess Lakshmi selflessly and serve someone, I do not have to make any separate request to Mother Lakshmi. Mother Lakshmi knows that if I put anything in his bag, it will bring life to fifty thousand people, it will brighten fifty thousand lives. He doesn't have to ask. Where there is more selfishness, all these rituals take place. This has to be done like this, this broom has to be kept like this otherwise lakshmi will not enter. This should be on the right side, that should be on the left side. smear turmeric here vermilion there, Enough of this. If your Lakshmi is so superficial then she cannot be a goddess. But she is a mother. She is an image of purity. Even the life of sages and saints cannot survive without Lakshmi. I am not against Lakshmi, otherwise you would misunderstand me. It is only because of the mother that life is moving forward. She is very important. But she should come as consequence of righteousness. not to be spend on pleasures, to accomplish yoga In fact, I believe that Mother Lakshmi will not be as happy with any one as would be with me. That's the Faith. So this time the parikrama will happen on the 12th only, people who always come here. I can see a few faces. Come please, I will wait, this time I will wait enthusiastically. It's on Diwali. If you have heard the words of a poet, he says that if it were in my power, I would bring revolution to the whole world. I will celebrate Eid for the poor by looting Kuber's entire treasure. gar iktiyaar ho mujhe toh inklaabe jadid kar du loota du taaro ka khazana gariboain ki eid kar du So I believe that he is a true devotee of Lakshmi. Today Ratan Tata has earned how much and how much he has Donated. Such people will remain immortal in history forever. Never saw selfishness. People like Sudha Murthy are living a simple life, really why do you want to see Goddess? Look at them. I would say that Goddess Lakshmi resides at the feet of Ratan Tata. And I don't have the slightest hesitation in saying this, on the contrary, Goddess Lakshmi would be happy that I am handling the subject in the right manner. You tell me who is the richest person in the world? It's Bill Gates. May be you know. you just go and ask him whether you worship laxmi on diwali, he would rather reply \"who is this laxm?\" he would ask, \"who is this laxm?\" i am not insulting laxmi please don't misinterpret i just want to say that he don't even know who laxmi is but still he the world's richest if one can be rich flattering Laxmi then how bill gates would be the richest. Intention is not to insult laxmi ji, i just want to say that where there is talent and hard work, She never looks if he worships me or not she just enters in one's adobe therefore she is mother Prayer of Mother Laxmi o mother laxmi, I don't want to use you; I want to worship you. unless i have the longing to experience every happiness of this world, how can i worship you? i will only utilize you. O my mother make me so sensitive that i can feel the hunger of someone Feel me with so much compassion that i could not bear to look at the diseased. Make me so literate that i could not bear illiteracy among others. O mother bestow the treasure of discrimination and dispassion so i can worship your universal form o mother in this way i could do your real worship, not your use as your are my destination not my support until you find indulgent behavior in me pine me for money and when you find that i am living and dying to serve you universal form then o my mother give up everything on me even being impoverished if you want to come in my life mother then come being vairagya laxmi not as a bhog laxmi",
    "Description": "…",
    "Tags": "sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, saipooja, Saili Sagar",
    "Views": "3,487 views",
    "Likes": "259"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Grinding Sai's wheat means swallowing the inevitable death of the devotees",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w09_YnHthNo",
    "Transcript": "This chapter—the story of grinding wheat—listen to me carefully. Baba says, if you understand the secret of this chapter, you will swallow inevitable death—death will not swallow you If you grasp the mystery of this leela, you will overcome death; it will have no power over you. That is the power of this leela. But once this leela is revealed, you'll understand what I truly mean. Now, we’ll try to uncover the mystery of the first leela— the story of grinding wheat from Chapter One of the Sai Satcharitra. We all know this story. We all know this story. Through this act, Baba performed a divine miracle. But what exactly was Baba trying to convey through it? What is the spiritual meaning behind this leela? I hope everyone is aware of the story, whoever knows the story please raise your hands. Ok, everyone knows it, so I can dive straight into the deeper significance of the story. Let’s look at Chapter One, Verse 138 ‘Kaay asava anubandh, gavha rogacha kaay sambandh, pahuni atarkya kaaran nirbandh, vaatla prabandh lihava.’ \"What kind of strange connection is this? What does disease have to do with the wheat?\" By grinding wheat and scattering the flour outside the boundaries of the village, Baba brought an end to the plague— the deadly epidemic that had taken hold. But Hemadpant writes— \"I couldn’t understand what connection the wheat flour had with the epidemic.\" Now look, he raised the question in Chapter 1 of the Sai Satcharitra, but he didn’t give the answer— right? How many of us have wondered about it? Please raise your hands Very few have raised their hands. that means we often don’t read that deeply. What did he write? “What strange connection is this— what does disease have to do with all this?” What’s the link between wheat and the plague? By grinding wheat and scattering the flour outside the village boundary, the epidemic was kept out. But still—what’s the connection between flour and the plague? You see, he raised the question but left us thirsty for an answer. That’s how I would put it—he left us thirsty. So through this leela, what exactly is the connection between flour and the disease? What link could there possibly be between wheat flour and a deadly epidemic? There’s a saying about powerful Sadgurus like Baba: “Kartum, Akartum, Anyatha Kartum Samarth.” It’s a Sanskrit verse meaning— They have the power to do, undo, or do otherwise. Those who behold this power are known as sadgurus Now about the plague—it is said that it devours exactly the number of people it’s meant to, and then it vanishes silently. Once every hundred years, this epidemic arrives. And when it does, it quietly takes the lives it’s destined to and disappears. So what did Baba say to the plague? “You want to eat humans, don’t you?” Baba asked the epidemic. And what is a human body made from? Food. The human body is formed from food. Food creates vitality. Vitality leads to birth. And food sustains the child. In essence, a human being is born, lives, and grows— all on the foundation of food. And this is exactly what is explained in Chapter 38, Ovi 16. ‘Parabrahma Swaroop annam, tyatuni bhute hoti nishpann, Annachi jeeve jagaya sadhan, annantarleen avsani.’ So it is said—life is born from food, life is sustained by food, and eventually, life dissolves back into food (it becomes food for others, after death). Baba instructed epidemic and said: \"You will not eat the people of this village. Instead, I will offer you a part of what sustains them— a bit of the flour that represents their nourishment. Eat this little portion of flour and leave quietly.\" In other words, Baba didn’t let the epidemic devour human lives— he gave it flour to ‘consume’ instead. He told it: ‘Take this offering and walk away silently from this village. Do not set foot here.’ This is Baba’s divine power That’s why he is called \"Kartum, Akartum, Anyatha Kartum Samarth\"— the one who can do, undo, or do otherwise. It’s as if there was a silent pact between Baba and the epidemic— ‘You won’t touch a single human here. Instead, take this flour. I’m giving you dignity— honor this gesture and leave quietly.’ And so it left. Not a single person in the village was harmed. No one fell victim to the epidemic. That’s what the scripture says. That’s what history records. Now I want to ask all of you something. During the recent pandemic—during COVID— how many of you truly believe that Baba protected us? Please, raise your hands. Look—every heart knows this: if we’re alive today, it’s because Baba protected us. Right before our eyes, so many lives were lost. So many families shattered. If we survived, it was Baba’s grace. Now let me ask one more thing— how many of you believe that for as long as this universe exists, Baba will keep us alive? Please listen to the question carefully. Pay close attention. Don’t respond too quickly. How many of you believe that Baba will keep you alive, as long as this universe continues to exist? Raise your hands if you do. Not a single hand is going up. Not a single hand. Which means—we all know one truth: Death is inevitable. One day, death will swallow us. If saints die, if prophets die, then how will ordinary humans escape it? Great saints and prophets— even they have to leave their bodies, they have to take samadhi. So what about us? We are just ordinary human beings. But listen carefully— this chapter of grinding wheat in the Sai Satcharitra— Baba says, if you understand the secret of this Leela, then you will be able to swallow death itself. Death will not be able to swallow you. If you grasp the truth of this Leela, you will conquer death. That’s the power in this Leela. Once this Leela is revealed, you will understand what I’m saying. Through this Leela, Baba is telling us: “I have saved you from untimely death.” He already saved us from COVID. But there is one death that is certain— and one day, that death will swallow us. There is no doubt about it—it’s 101% guaranteed. if you want to go beyond its grip, if you want to swallow that death— then you must understand the secret of this Leela. And if you do, then one day, you will swallow death itself. Now you may wonder why I’m saying all this. Let me come to the point. To understand this Leela— the Leela of grinding wheat— you must understand the 100th ovī of the first chapter of the Sai Satcharitra. ‘Phalashecha purnaviraam, kaamyatyagache hechi varm, Karne nityanaimityik karm, ‘shudh swadharm’ ya naav.’ In this ovi as I mentioned earlier— where I said you can swallow inevitable death— the secret is hidden in this ovi. How can an ordinary human being swallow inevitable death, while death rules the entire world? And yet, Baba says: “You can swallow that death, you can defeat it, before it devours you— you can devour it first.” ‘Phalashecha purnaviraam, kaamyatyagache hechi varm, Karne nityanaimityik karm, ‘shudh swadharm’ ya naav.’ And remember— whenever I explain a Leela, I never just speak my own interpretations. So understand this line well: ‘Phalashecha purnaviraam, kaamyatyagache hechi varm, Karne nityanaimityik karm, ‘shudh swadharm’ ya naav.’ And remember— whenever I explain a Leela, I never just speak my own interpretations. What I say is based on deep meanings, from the scriptures and their essence. If I have to reveal any Leela, there's always an Ovi in the Sai Satcharitra that serves as the master key. If I grasp that Ovi correctly and understand its deeper meaning, then the entire Leela unfolds effortlessly. So this 100th ovi is the master key for this leela. Now this line from the ovi has the same meaning that Lord Krishna explains in the Bhagavad Gita: \"Karmanye vadhikaraste Ma Phaleshu Kadachana, Ma Karmaphalaheturbhur Mate Sangostvakarmani\" Lord Krishna says: “O human, you only have the right to action—not to the fruits of action. Do not be attached to the fruits of your work, and never be attached to inaction either.” He also says: Perform righteous actions with full devotion— but do not expect rewards. Do only pure, righteous, and prescribed actions— not prohibited ones. And even after putting your heart and soul into your work, do not crave the result. Perform your swadharma—your true duty—without attachment to the outcome. Now this is very difficult for a human being— to act sincerely, and yet expect nothing in return. “Falashecha purna viram”—complete renunciation of the desire for fruits. If you can truly understand and live this, you can conquer even inevitable death. That's all Baba is saying: “O human, perform the best of actions, actions that the scriptures call righteous, pure, and sacred. And while doing them, do not long for the fruits.” I'm not telling you to avoid responsibility. Don’t become detached or lazy. Perform your duties with full passion and energy—100% commitment. Fulfill your swadharma sincerely. Now this word—shuddha swadharma—is very important. What is shuddha swadharma? Now this word—shuddha swadharma—is very important. What is shuddha swadharma? Take the example of a doctor. A doctor’s shuddha swadharma is not just to earn money. If needed, he should work day and night— but not a single patient under his care should leave untreated. He should pray, “O Lord, may I heal everyone who comes to me.” The one who works with that kind of passion and selflessness— that is called Shuddha swadharma. Similarly, take a lawyer — suppose some cases come to him. He says, “Even if I have to die trying, the innocent — the truly innocent — must not be punished. They must be saved at any cost. Even if I perish, let it never happen that someone innocent is punished because of me.” This is the Shuddha swadharma — the righteous duty — of a lawyer. For a teacher, Shuddha swadharma means that when I teach a lesson, I teach it with such clarity that it imprints on the minds and hearts of my students forever. I should never mislead them or show them the wrong path. That’s the duty of a true teacher. Now take a housewife. Her Shuddha swadharma is to manage the household with the mindset that it's Sai Baba’s home. Even if she cooks simple dal and rice, she should pour so much love and flavor into it that if a guest eats it, it should feel like elixir. If she cleans the house, she should do it with such devotion that Baba is watching upon her Karmas. If she even cleans the toilet, it should be so clean that her own face is reflected in it. That is the Shuddha swadharma of a housewife. Similarly, for a student, Shuddha swadharma means, \"I will dedicate myself day and night to my studies. Similarly, for a student, Shuddha swadharma means, \"I will dedicate myself day and night to my studies. The result is up to God. The effort of the entire year is mine, but those three hours of the exam— that’s not in my control.\" Because in the Bhagavad Gita, Lord Krishna says, “I am memory in all beings.” That means memory is also a divine gift. So, even if a student studies sincerely all year, but during the three-hour exam, if the Divine decides to erase that memory, then what’s the use? That’s why Krishna says, “I am memory in all beings.” So those three hours belong to God. But it is the student’s duty to do their part with complete sincerity throughout the year. Baba says, when you perform your duties in society without selfish desires, you help the world bloom like a garden. You make this world fragrant. You beautify this world selflessly, and in return, I will beautify your inner being. That’s His promise. So what is nishkama karma (selfless action)? This Leela is an example of it. Everyone has their own Shuddha swadharma (pure personal duty). That’s why the Bhagavad Gita says, ‘swa-dharme nidhanaṁ śhreyaḥ para-dharmo bhayāvahaḥ’, that fulfilling your own dharma is the highest path. Let me give you an example. Today, this satsang (spiritual discourse) is going on. The importance of satsang is so great that even if you give up all your life's wealth just to hear a true saint for 15 minutes, it’s still a cheap bargain— as long as the saint is genuine. The importance of satsang is so great that even if you give up all your life's wealth just to hear a true saint for 15 minutes, it’s still a cheap bargain— as long as the saint is genuine. Kabir Ji says: \"Ek ghadi, aadhi ghadi, aadhuo so aadha Kabira sangat sadhu ki, katay koti aparadh.\"Meaning: Even a moment, or half of a moment, or even a quarter of that, which means just six minutes of true satsang from a saint— can wash away millions of sins. Such greatness has been described—now let me return to the idea of Shuddha Swadharma (pure personal duty). If every individual sincerely follows their own Swadharma, then—as the Lord says— \"This universe is my creation, and you will become its protector.\" You will become someone who uplifts it. Not only will you become spiritually elevated, you will also be someone who adds brilliance to this world. Your presence will illuminate others here, and you will have already claimed your rightful place in the higher realms. This is the essence of Karma Yoga. This is what Shuddha Swadharma truly means. Now, why is Nishkama Karma (selfless action) so important? Today, most people do any Karma only after asking: “What will I gain from this?” “Tell me the result first, then I’ll do the work.” But Krishna teaches the exact opposite— You must act without attachment to the fruits of your actions. And Baba, too, is teaching the same message through this very story. Now see what the story says: Four women hear that Baba is grinding wheat. They think that, \"Since Baba sustains himself through bhiksha (alms), he will surely distribute this among us.\" So they rush over and forcibly move Baba aside. They sit down themselves and begin grinding the wheat, while singing Baba’s praises. Baba sees their love and devotion and quietly steps aside. He doesn’t stop them—he lets them continue until the flour is completely ground. But once the flour is ready, the women begin to think, “We worked so hard, this flour now belongs to us.” So, each of them takes a portion, assuming ownership of it because of their effort. But just when they begin to leave with their share, Baba stops them. Notice—Baba didn’t stop them while they were working. He let them finish the task first—only then did he intervene. Baba already knew their intentions, that these women believed: “We did the work, so we’ve earned the right to the result.” They were acting with that sense of entitlement. So Baba said nothing till then. They were working with such energy—he let them do it. But the moment they tried to take the flour away, Baba scolded them harshly: \"Alya Phukat Khao Randhya! Luthaya maj dhav dhavu!\" Now, many YouTube channels bring this up— they highlight this exact page to argue that Sai Baba disrespected women by abusing them. But what these people do is, they refer to this small text, the Hindi translation of Shri Sai Satcharitra. This is not a complete text, it only focuses on the Leelas— they miss the main deeper Vedantic message behind the stories. They use these small texts out of context, just to say “Look! Baba insulted women.” To all the women sitting here, how many of you have ever felt hurt that Baba used such words? Please raise your hand. I’m fortunate that I am sitting amongst a good bunch of people. Look it is mentioned in Chapter 1, Verse 130 ‘Alya Randa phukatkhau, lutaya maj dhavdhavu, Gahu kaay majhe karjau, peeth neu pahata’ Let’s understand the secret of this Leela. Why did Baba use such words? What does “Phukat Khao Randhya” really mean? Unless you understand that, you won’t understand the real essence of this Sai Leela. How many of you have read the Jnaneshwari? In Chapter 7, Jnan-Vijnan Yoga, Saint Jnaneshwar criticizes the kind of devotees who keep switching deities for personal desires. Monday—Shiva. Tuesday—Ganesha. Wednesday—Vishnu. Thursday—Guru. Friday—Devi. Saturday—Shani or Hanuman. Sunday—Surya. Why do they keep switching? Because their desires aren’t fulfilled. So they go from one god to another. \"For the fulfillment of their desires, those who change gods—Sant Dnyaneshwar Maharaj has called their devotion \" prostitution bhakti\". Baba uses the same expression here— “Alya Phukat Khao Randhya”— but it’s not directed at any women. It’s directed at every human whose mind is selfish— anyone doing desire-driven devotion. Baba didn’t insult any woman. He was calling out the attitude of selfishness. And the people who aren’t doing Purusharth or making spiritual effort— those who don’t strive to transform their mind and inturn achieve control over their heart. All of them are women. Scriptures say so. Then who is a true Purusha (man)? Only the one who looks at his own faults, his desires, his impurities— and works on them with sincerity. From that perspective, everyone is a “woman.” Only the one who works sincerely on his inner self is a true “man.” So just because we have a male body doesn’t mean we’re truly “men” in the spiritual sense. So just because we have a male body doesn’t mean we’re truly “men” in the spiritual sense. That’s why women should never take those words personally. Baba said them only to highlight the selfish mindset. Now let’s clarify this even more with a couplet from Kabir: “Ram Piyara Chhadi Kari, Kare Aan Ka Jaap Baisya Kera Poot Jyu, Kahe Kisko Baap” Meaning: People leave beloved Ram and worship other gods (for fulfilment of desires). Their devotion is like that of a prostitute — who doesn’t know who is the father of her son. Now here, Kabirji also referred to selfish devotion — sakam bhakti — in a very strong way. He quoted a line: “Veshya kera poot, jyu kahe kisko baap” — Just like a courtesan cannot say with certainty who the father of the child she’s carrying is, In the same way, when you worship dozens of deities out of selfish desires, Even if your desire is fulfilled, you cannot say with confidence which deity fulfilled it. In the same way, when you worship dozens of deities out of selfish desires, Even if your desire is fulfilled, you cannot say with confidence which deity fulfilled it. In the same way, when you worship dozens of deities out of selfish desires, Even if your desire is fulfilled, you cannot say with confidence which deity fulfilled it. So Baba called such selfish devotees “phukat khau randa” — a harsh term for empty or impure devotion. People who criticize Baba — saying, “Look, he used abusive language, he disrespected women” This is the real spiritual essence of this Leela. This is to show how dangerous selfish devotion is. Here, Baba refers to such devotion as adulterous or impure. What did the women do? As soon as the grinding work was done, they took the flour without asking and left, Thinking: “We worked for this, so we have a right to it.” Baba didn’t stop them during the work. He allowed them to do it, remained silent — But when they tried to take the flour — the fruit of their selfish effort — He did not let them take it. Instead, Baba told them to go and throw it on the village borders. Their intention was selfish, but look at Baba’s compassion — He didn’t let that karma go to waste or serve personal gain. He transformed their ordinary, selfish action into karma yoga. This is the grace of a true Sadguru. It was a purely self-centered act, but Baba didn’t let them take personal benefit from it. Instead, He converted it into a selfless act that helped stop the spread of the plague. So if sakam karma (selfish action) is that dangerous, And nishkam karma (selfless action) is so noble, Then Baba took their selfish action and transformed it into nishkam karma yoga. And what is the fruit of nishkam karma yoga? Its greatest benefit is that it rapidly purifies the mind (chitta). And once the chitta is pure, it becomes ready for devotion (bhakti). It then leads to ananya bhakti — undivided devotion — Which in turn leads to gyan (true knowledge) and moksha (liberation). And moksha means attaining immortality — Where death cannot even enter your being. In this way, this Leela is a spiritual journey from conquering untimely death (akaal mrityu) To ultimately conquering inevitable death (atal mrityu). Now let me give you an example to help you understand better. Everyone sitting here probably experience fear of death. There's no doubt about that. But have you ever asked yourself — why does this fear haunt us? The only reason is this: The more unfulfilled desires you have, The greater your fear of death. As desires reduce — the fear of death also starts diminishing. And when a person becomes completely desireless (nishkam), The fear of death completely disappears from their life. Such a person conquers death. Have you ever felt this? This is the deeper spiritual teaching Baba is giving us through this Leela: That through nishkam karma yoga, one can conquer even atal mrityu. Baba said — “I have saved you from the plague, from untimely death (akaal mrityu). But what about that sword of inevitable death hanging above your head?” It can fall at any time. So how do you protect yourself from that? There’s only one way — and that is nishkam karma yoga. Is not just about protection from untimely death, But also about the spiritual journey of conquering inevitable death. That’s the deeper mystery hidden in this chapter. This is the very important aspect of this Leela. This is the very important aspect of this Leela. How many of you agree with what I’ve said? Please raise your hands. Thank you. And how many of you didn’t understand this Leela? Please raise your hands. Thank you very much. Alright, now if I end this Leela here, it would remain incomplete, so let me complete it. In Chapter 35, there's a story of Balaji Patil Nivaskar which is in complete contrast to the Leela of the four women. Balaji Patil Nivaskar was a farmer. He toiled hard throughout the year, sweating under the sun and rain, working in the fields. After harvesting his grains, he would load them onto bullock carts and bring them to Shirdi. He would pour all the grains before Baba and stand there with his hands stretched out like a beggar, saying, “Master, please give me whatever you wish. I’ll live on that.” He would stand there just like a beggar, and whatever Baba put into his cloth, that’s all he would take. This is nishkam karmayoga. Baba has even mentioned such Leelas. So, when will we reach the level of Balaji Patil? How many years will it take? Those four women symbolize Sakam Bhakti (devotion with desire), while Balaji Patil represents Nishkam Bhakti (desireless devotion). He worked all year, endured hardship, and when he finally got the grains, he simply offered them at Baba’s feet. He stood there like a beggar saying, “Master, give me as much as you wish.” Blessed is the Sadguru who receives such gems as disciples. This Leela is the exact opposite of the one in the first chapter. That’s why I included it—otherwise, the earlier story would remain incomplete. So this was the story of grinding wheat in the first chapter. Now, the inevitable death that is bound to come for all of us—Baba revealed how to conquer that death through Nishkam Karmayog (selfless action). If someone is working in an office, they should do their job with utmost sincerity—not for a promotion, but because Baba is watching them 24 hours a day. That is Nishkam Karmayog. You know, sitting with the Sai Satcharitra for half an hour is one thing. But the 8 hours you spend at work is the real field of your Swadharma (true duty). If you don’t do your duty sincerely during the day, then in the evening when you sit with the Granth (holy text), your mind will never settle. Never. That half-hour of evening reading should immerse you. When will that immersion happen? Only if you’ve performed your daily karmayog sincerely. If you’ve fulfilled your Swadharma during the day, then that evening time is truly yours and Baba’s. But if you’ve been dishonest during the day, slacked off, avoided hard work, then your mind won’t be pure, won’t be steady. And that half-hour you sit in the evening with the Granth—you won’t be able to enter it deeply. Please understand this well. If you want to immerse fully in the Granth during that half-hour in the evening, then your daytime karma—your duty—should be performed excellently. Only then will that evening time be fulfilling, possibly even tearful with devotion. That chapter you read will be experienced deeply. If you’ve wasted your day—spent it scrolling your mobile, gossiping— then don’t expect to dive deep into the Granth in the evening. Honestly, that half-hour or 45 minutes you want to spend immersed in the Granth— you must earn it by performing your daily duties sincerely. That’s Swadharma. That is Nishkam Karmayog. And what happens then? The Lord says, “You’re beautifying my creation, this universe that I have designed, because you’re working without selfishness.” So the essence of this entire wheat grinding story is this. I now want to show a movie clip. Please pay attention—it's from the film 3 Idiots. There are many youngsters here, so you may relate to it well. In the movie, there's a student who doesn’t want to work hard. He relies on wearing rings, doing rituals, fasting during planetary transits, etc., hoping to pass. But he doesn’t follow his Swadharma—he doesn’t work hard. Eventually, life knocks sense into him. He realizes that all this won't work—only hard work does. There’s an interview scene I want you to watch. It captures the entire message of this chapter in one scene. It’s my habit—whenever I conduct satsangs, there is always a projector—I use clips from movies or epic tales. Whether it’s from Ramayan, Mahabharat, or Bhagavatam, if it helps convey the message better, I use it. I hope you're taking this in the right spirit. I haven’t done anything wrong, have I? So this was about Nishkam Karmayog. if it helps convey the message better, I use it. I hope you're taking this in the right spirit. I haven’t done anything wrong, have I? And the scene itself conveys the same: He says, “My bones had to break before I realized—I should not beg. Whether or not you give me the job, I’ll keep my attitude. It came after much struggle, and now I won’t change.” So everyone sitting here today—let us also not change our attitude, let us not lose our integrity—no matter how hard life gets. Baba is with us.",
    "Description": "✨Shri Sai Satcharitra Adhyay 1 (Ovi 100, 110-138)✨\nA subtle spiritual journey from being shielded against uncertain death to transcending inevitable death.\nExperience the miraculous story and thoughtful insights of Shri Krishnaji on Shirdi Sai Baba's divine intervention during a time of devastating pestilence. In this captivating episode, we recount the profound Leela where Baba used just a handful of wheat flour to protect the village of Shirdi from a deadly outbreak, while also unveiling the higher spiritual dimension he was leading us toward.\nDiscover how this simple act became a powerful symbol of Baba’s grace and imparted a deeper lesson among his devotees.\n✨What was the significance of the wheat flour?\n✨How to overcome the fear of inevitable death?\n✨What is Nishkama Karma?\n✨Why did Sai Baba abuse ladies?\n✨How did Sai Baba transform a Sakam Karma into a path of Nishkama Karma?\n✨Why do people fear death?\nJoin us in exploring this powerful tale of divine compassion, protection, and the unending love of Sai Baba.\n🙏🏻Om Sai Ram🙏🏻 \n\n----------------\n0:00 Introduction\n1:54 The Unspoken Riddle\n3:52 True Power of a Sadguru\n4:19 What is pestilence?\n4:42 Significance of wheat flour\n7:06 Untimely and inevitable death\n10:11 Shuddha Swadharma\n21:11 Nishkaam Karma\n21:44 Overcoming inevitable death\n36:09 Nevaskar: Nishkaam Karmayoga\n38:44 Secret to immerse deeply in Sai Satcharitra\n41:59 3 Idiots: scene\n-----------------\n\n✨श्री साई सच्चरित्र अध्याय 1\n(ओवी 100, 110–138)✨\nएक सूक्ष्म आध्यात्मिक यात्रा:\nअकाल मृत्यु से संरक्षण पाने से लेकर अटल मृत्यु के पार जाने तक।\nश्री कृष्णाजी की विचारशील व्याख्या और शिर्डी साई बाबा की चमत्कारिक कृपा की कथा का अनुभव करें, जब उन्होंने एक भयंकर महामारी के समय दिव्य हस्तक्षेप किया।\nइस मनोहर कड़ी में हम उस गूढ़ लीला का वर्णन करते हैं, जहाँ बाबा ने केवल एक मुट्ठी गेहूँ के आटे का उपयोग करके शिर्डी गांव को एक घातक बीमारी से बचाया, और साथ ही उस उच्च आध्यात्मिक दिशा को प्रकट किया, जिसकी ओर वे हमें मार्गदर्शित कर रहे थे।\nजानिए कैसे बाबा का यह साधारण-सा कार्य उनकी कृपा का एक शक्तिशाली प्रतीक बन गया और उनके भक्तों को एक गहरा आध्यात्मिक संदेश प्रदान कर गया।\n✨गेहूँ के आटे का क्या महत्व था?\n✨अटल मृत्यु के भय से कैसे पार पाया जा सकता है?\n✨निष्काम कर्म क्या होता है?\n✨साई बाबा औरतों को गाली क्यों देते थे?\n✨साई बाबा ने सकाम कर्म को निष्काम कर्मयोग में कैसे रूपांतरित किया?\n✨मृत्यु का भय लोगों को क्यों सताता है?\nआइए, इस करूणामयी लीला, दैवीय संरक्षण और साई बाबा के अनंत प्रेम की इस अद्भुत कथा को जानें।\n🙏🏻ॐ साई राम🙏🏻\n\nReference: \n1. Adhyay 38-  परब्रह्मस्वरूप अन्न। त्यांतुनी भूतें होतीं निष्पन्न। अन्नचि जीवें जगाया साधन। अन्नांतर्लीन अवसानीं ॥१६॥\n\n2. 3 Idiots Movie Scene - https://drive.google.com/file/d/17Fbw...\n\n#SaiLeelaRahasya #SaiBaba #MiraclesOfSaiBaba #SpiritualStories #SaiLeela #spiritualism #krishnaji #DivineProtection#KrishnajionGehukiLeela #saisatcharitraleelas #jaisai #shirdisai #saiamritvachan #saiamritvani #corespirituality #trending #explore #saidarshanshirdi …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, saipooja, Saili Sagar",
    "Views": "5,957 views",
    "Likes": "375"
  },
  {
    "Title": "श्री साई सच्चरित इतना रहस्यमयी क्यों हैं ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L3OXUHYaCLA",
    "Transcript": "Jesus spoke this throughout his life His teaching goes as far as this,\"if someone has plenty, God will give them more listen this words carefully that \"if someone has plenty, god will give them more but if someone has next to nothing even that will be taken away from him as you are asking it straight forwardly that why this Sai satcharitra is so mystified unbounded, unending as the sky above, baba's life is beyond all comprehension. who but He and He alone can comprehend it fully or with His compassion can someone unfold it with one's experience if we want to understand this world then with the possession of two qualities this world is thoroughly. first is sagacity and second intense memorizing power, with this two a man can understand the world completely but, in the context of spirituality along with these two qualities tenderness of heart and righteousness is also needed then it is when this spiritual book opens. Baba might wanted to give the message that until the sight of righteousness comes to you until you look at it with the purity of mind or with My heart or My perspective, not a single leela will be unfolded for you because spirituality means intrinsic journey not external one so for internal journey Baba's wish than baba's external life what baba's heart converses with us or what it has to say, until we are able to peek into his heart this charitra will not open \"with this outward focused attitude you cannot reach Me, you will have to be inward\", was the main objective of baba this is main objective behind compiling this charitra in such a manner that until you increase your conscience, until purity of mind does not comes to you, until you understand my heart or wish you will not be able to understand charitra(book) there is a verse from sai satcharitra which will share clarity ch16 v135 he says,\" aadhi lage chittshudhi, vari sukshm kushagr buddhi, tevhach prakteha trishuddhi, krupa samruddhi swaymav\" he is clearly saying that sagacity and purity of mind is needed for blessings to be bestowed and to unfold the charitra also the vision of nobility is needed then it gradually opens as we continue our inner journey ans with faith and fidelity we live the way as He want, one by one each of its leela is revealed om sai ram every sai devotee wishes to read and understand this sacred scripture. however, due to not gaining access into the scripture a devotee is compelled to read the books which are easy and understand and filled with miracles avoiding this holy text but we need to accept this bitter truth that in the name of sai millions of books are written and are being written aggregating them all not even a single verse of Sai satcharitra can be constructed some leela are for initial stage of spiritual practice and some will be opened at intermediate stage and leela will open only when a person reaches at the top level of practice but what baba might want to say that till you start living practically it won't open today if he has enabled me to speak these while sitting here, neither me nor anybody could have done this without his blessing this is how it is made. i ll give some reference from the parables of Jesus because Jesus thought through parables which are moral stories he never gave direct preaching. he always preached through parables and left it over to devotees for it's meaning and only it is possible if nobility within you awakens rest you cannot estimate the meaning of my words by merely reading scriptures and books. Jesus spoke this throughout his life His teaching goes as far as this,\"if someone has plenty, God will give them more listen this words carefully that \"if someone has plenty, god will give them more but if someone has next to nothing even that will be taken away from them be aware of how you listen as one who has will be given more and from one who doesn't have, even what have will be taken away from them now these are his words and if think why he said it as it is completely opposite now this is the statement came from his words so we cannot doubt it. There must be some meaning something implied so he wants to say that someone who abundance of knowledge along with righteousness, just he has not spoken the word. so along with righteousness, purity of mind he possess plenty of knowledge So i or God will give more to such a person. and who has only bookish knowledge deprived of righteousness will robbed of it as his parables are same is the Sai satcharitra and baba filled with compassion says words in 32nd chapter reflecting this topic he says, \"I am here to give spiritual knowledge but know one looks at me with this emotion\" related to this is the verse maje sarkar nya nya vade, majlas jo toh mhane dede everyone says.\"give me\" koni na mazya bola si laksh de, ek hi sudhe aike na not single one wants to listen me consciously this world wants worldly desires they completely ensnared into enjoyment of pleasures consequently they yearn for same some ask for money others for offspring and some seek success in business these are the one who ask for something no one heeds my words. no one listens too me attentively my treasure of spirituality is overflowing bring your carts and replete it with it. That means he is expressing his sentiment with a big heart as if he longing for giving it come dig and carry it away by the cart loads, plunder me. But no one bothers to make effort for spiritual gains and further says'\" mi mhane toh paika kahnava , gadya vari lootun nyava, khara maiecha put asava , tenech bharava bhandar\" at last getting irked he said that only he will collect the treasure who is truly his mother's son. so his longing is clearly visible from these verses for what his incarnation has occurred to give and what are we seeking from him? and if you say with this view satcharitra should open then it won't om sai ram. The essence of this enunciation, first, this Sai satcharitra is not only baba's heart and soul but baba himself second, it has been made too intricate and deep on purpose to awaken the faith within us because righteousness is the key by which the safe of Sai satcharitra is opened not extroversion but introversion is the tool to know its secrets third, there are Millions of books to make you reach the physical court of sai but to take you to his soul there is only one book Sai satcharitra fourth, if you try to unfold the secret of leela with selfish or desiring devotion then for millions of birth it would be futile fifth, shunning your wish and wearing the diadem of his wish and that to with selflessness attitude drenched with selfless devotion that to understanding his inner heartfelt wish sixth, with the perspective of our wish, our desires, our difficulties and our emotions if we look at Sai satcharitra then even reciting it for several years won't give you entry in that holy book or baba's heart seventh, in the end on this enunciation only this much can be said that many people know about baba, but there are very few who believe in baba one which apprehends mind, overcomes bane and calamities, annihilates ignorance, bestows deliverance, the ultimate source of welfare, truth awareness and bliss giver mother of sai, direct form of sai, diadem of all scriptures, glory to shree sai satcharitra divine granth",
    "Description": "श्री साई सच्चरित इतना रहस्यमयी क्यों हैं? …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "8,606 views",
    "Likes": "462"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई को ही अपना सद्गुरु माने या कोई शरीर धारी गुरु चाहिए",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zEUu_cON-ig",
    "Transcript": "Can we consider Baba as Guru and surrender to the Guru, Know Guru’s wish are we able to do that. Do we have the capability of directly connecting to Baba. If you have that capability then you should connect directly. There is no need of any middleman. I had attended your Pune program. I want to ask you a question. Baba spoke of Guru, is that Guru beyond attributes (Nirguna) and formless (Nirakara) Paramatma Baba says God is One (Sabka Malik Ek), Allah is God (Allah Malik). Want to know about this. This is an important question. Baba in Adhyay 32 says Guru Prakatla. What was the need of Guru for Baba. Baba is all capable. Baba is incarnate. Baba is also known as Brahma Gyani but to set an example for us, he comes down to our level and tries to explain things to us. Today whatever verses Sisters and brothers narrated, are we able to live these verses. This is my first question. Can we consider Baba as Guru and surrender to the Guru, Know Guru’s wish are we able to do that. Do we have the capability of directly connecting to Baba. If you have that capability then you should connect directly. There is no need of any middleman. In the Adhyay 2 there is this story of Balasaheb Bhatte v/s Hemadpant. Babalsaheb Bhatte is of the opinion that without Guru Knowledge is not possible. I will take up some verses so that it becomes clear. Hemadpantji says Jyache tynechi kele pahije, na kari tyasi Gurune kay kijiye. Na halavita hath pay jo nije, tayasi dije kay kavane. Adhyay 2 Verse 152. As per this verse everyone has to follow his own spiritual pursuits. And the one who does not follow human pursuits, does not struggle for spirituality, to such a person Guru cannot give anything even if he wants to To live a spiritual life one who does not move his hands and legs and spreads his legs and sleeps, such a non-follower of human pursuits, how much ever big a Guru maybe what can he give to his disciple. Apli Sadsatvicharbuddhi, Aple sadhan chittashuddhi, te jugaruni jo kubiddhi, Guru Kay Siddhi dei tya. Adhyay 2 Verse 162. Now in this where is Hemadpant wrong? God has given us the wisdom to discern right from wrong. What is essence and what is insubstantial. What is Ultimate good (Shreya) and Pleasure (Preya). What is righteousness and what is injustice. Our goal is to achieve purity of mind. If both these, pure thoughts and purification of mind are dropped and wisdom is converted to foolishness, to such an irrational person how can guru give Siddhis. Every thing that Hemadpantji says is true but he is rejecting the Gurus. He is denying the necessity of the Guru otherwise his every word has power. Jyache tynechi kele pahije – following the human pursuits is necessary. na kari tyasi Gurune kay kijiye. Na halavita hath pay jo nije, tayasi dije kay kavane. Apli Sadsatvicharbuddhi, Aple sadhan chittashuddhi, te jugaruni jo kubiddhi, Guru Kay Siddhi dei tya. On this Balasaheb Bhatte gives his arguments and speaks Tav bole virudh pakshakar, honarasi nahi Pratikar, Hoshyaman nahi talanar, mi mi mahnanar bhagale. (Adhyay 2 Verse 157). Arguing against Hemadpantji Bhatteji says whatever has to happen will happen, whatever is written in our destiny will happen, people who think of only themselves have fallen apart. This is very indecisive and Baba has not given complete answer also. Now if I ask a question here that 99% people will say that Hemadpant is wrong. What Bhatte is saying that is only correct. But I say that both are wrong. Both are talking of extremes. One says that if one does it by oneself only then it is possible to grow spiritually and the other is saying that it is not possible until one gets a Guru. The answer to this is in Adhyay 48 verse 44. This controversy is raised in the second chapter. And the answer is in Adhyay 48. Karma matra me karnar – here comes Hemadpant. Samarth hariguru phal denar – This is Bhatte. When both meet, Hemadpant and Bhatte then the journey completes. I only have the authority to do karma, but to give fruits of the action is my Hari and Guru. one who has such a strong faith can cross the ocean of existence. It means efficiency of work and surrender to Guru both are absolutely required. Karma matra me karnar, Samarth hariguru phal denar, Aisa Jyacha Drudh nirdhar, Beda par tayacha. This means following the human pursuits as well as surrender to Guru both are required. When Ganga and Yamuna confluence it is called Confluence of three rivers (Triveni Sangam). In a dormant form the Ganga, Yamuna and Saraswati meet. Both following human pursuits and surrender to Guru both are needed. Many people feel that it is Guru’s Grace. Guru’s grace is always flowing, it is flowing 24 hours but our vessel is upside down. If our vessel is upright then His grace will flow 24 hours. Only we should be ready. Now the question is if knowledge is not possible without Guru, And Baba is our Sadguru, inspite of Baba being our Sadguru do we need a physical Guru is also a question. Even though we have Samarth Sadguru, if we have Baba do we need a physical Guru. Those who can directly reach the heart of Baba, if in the past life they have already made that journey, those who can reach Baba’s heart directly they do not need any other Guru. But if you don’t have the capability of reaching to the depth of Baba’s heart then there is an absolute need to have a Guru and there are no two opinions about it. Baba only gives this answer in Adhyay 11 Verse 10 – Pujak jetvar sakaru, dehdharich avashyak Guru – here he clears it. Till such time the worshipper thinks of himself as having a body, he does not have the knowledge that he is a soul and thinks of himself as body, then he needs a physical Guru. Baba tells this here. The one who can take you on the right path, can show the right path, but save yourself from false Guru. Baba says Bande ko Banda mila, chute kon upay, seva kar nirbandh ki, jo pal me lai chuday. So, while accepting a Guru just as you filter water, similarly you should be capable of recognizing Guru otherwise you will get stuck. If you come across a wrong Guru then you will be stuck. Pujak jetvar sakaru, dehdharich avashyak Guru, Nirakaras Nirakaru, ha nirdharu shastracha. If you yourself have become formless, then you will be able to connect with Baba who is without qualities and formless. You will be able to understand the depth of his heart. But if you do not have such capabilities then whomsoever you have faith on then consider him as Guru and move further on your path. I can say this with clarity. And if you have surrender. Why does this question arise is because we are unwilling to bend. If Baba could bend in front of a person like Jawaharali then why can’t you bend in front of a righteous person. Jene dehacha abhiman jalila, tenechi ha deha sarthaki lavila, Mag to hoil konachahi chela, Sadhavayala paramarth. The one who burns pride of the body, his ego to ashes, such a person has made his body, his existence meaningful. Such an egoless person can become anyone’s disciple because his aim is only spirituality. The problem is the pride of body, my ego, I will not bend in front of anybody, I am bending in front of Baba so I will not bend in front of any other person. This is ego. If you have the capability of knowing Baba’s heart, Baba’s soul and knowing Baba the way he is, then you do not have need for a physical Guru. But if you do not have that capability then you absolutely need a physical Guru. And if you drop your ego and see then within the radius of 5 km from your house you will get 50 people who will be better than you. Only ego needs to be dropped. When I say this, I do not say that you consider me as a Guru, I am not talking from this filthy emotion. If you have the capability of dropping your body and ego, if your sight is clear then 5 km away from your house you will get 50 such good people who are better than you and can be your Guru is what I want to say. one which apprehends mind, overcomes bane and calamities, annihilates ignorance, bestows deliverance, the ultimate source of welfare, truth awareness and bliss giver mother of sai, direct form of sai, diadem of all scriptures, glory to shree sai satcharitra divine granth",
    "Description": "…",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "6,502 views",
    "Likes": "423"
  },
  {
    "Title": "सद्गुरु साई का ऐसा इंसाफ न भूतो न भविष्यति",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hF_5MyvX8Ag",
    "Transcript": "Baba took one's coin and he did not even express his wish that the coin should be purified from Baba's hands and should return to my hands. It's in his mind. He hasn't even told his friend. Baba, knowing his inner feelings, returns the coin to him. And the other is asking Baba thet coin. On the contrary, Baba takes twenty-five rupees from him and says that even if stack pile of money, I will not return this coin. Today let's start with a leela Chapter 29 (Shri Sai Satcharitra) Captain Hatay's story. First let me tell you a story. Captain Hatayji used to live in Gwalior. He was a true devotee of Baba. One day a feeling awakens in his mind that I will send a coin of one rupee to Baba at Shirdi and if Baba touches that coin with his hand and sanctifies (purify) it and send it back to me, then I will keep it in my puja room and worship it always. This is the feeling so one of his friends going to Shirdi from Gwalior on knowing his departure, he does not tell his friend. With what feeling he is giving this coin to him. He gives the coin and tells him to go and give it to Baba. And his friend left, taking one rupee believing that this coin is being given to offer to Baba. That friend comes to Shirdi and reaches Dwarkamai. First he gives his share of dakshina as wished to baba. And Baba takes it and keeps it in his pocket. But as soon as he remembers that Hatay had also given him a coin, he takes it out and gives it to Baba and he is assuming that Baba will also put that coin in his pocket.Because Hatay has not told his inner wish about the coin he has sent. But Baba is omniscient and knows everything. So Baba looks at that coin, looks at it back and forth, tosses it, plays with it for a while and in the spirit with which Captain Hatay has sent this coin to me, tells him to keep this coin in his puja room and worship it. There is no need for anything Baba knows the feelings that were hidden in the mind and gives that coin to the friend. Now when this leela took place, other villagers and devotees of Baba who had come from far away places were present in Baba's court One Vamanrao Narvekar, a devotee, was also sitting among them. He wonders why we have not understood this behaviour? This devotee sitting in Gwalior has so much wisdom that if he touches one rupee from Baba's hand and keeps it with him, then there will be heaps of money in the house. So Vamanrao Narvekar thinks why can't he do this work? So he goes to the market and finds a coin which has Ram Laxman Sita on one side and Hanumanji on the other side. He finds such a coin and gives it in Shyama's hand, saying that let the coin be touched with Baba's hand, purify it and give it back to me. I also want to worship it. It is completely opposite Leela. Baba takes that coin in his hand and asks Shyama to keep it with himself. Shyama says no baba, just as you returned the coin to Captain Hatay, similarly he also feels that this coin should be returned to him. Well, does he want this coin? Then tell him that if he gives twenty-five rupees, I will return this coin to him. At that time, twenty-five rupees was much of a value. He does not have money, helplessly he collects money from here and there, takes loans, and thinks that at any cost he should get that coin blessed (consecrated) by Baba. He collects twenty-five rupees from here and there and gives it to Baba. Baba puts that also in his pocket. He says that even if you give me heaps of wealth, I will not return that coin to you. Now see, this story ends in Sai Satcharitra. How many people have read this story and remember it? Please raise your hand. Thank you all... So the story ends here. But what message did Baba want to give in this story?It is esoteric and mysterious, that is why the name of this satsang is Sai Leela Rahasya. Who has not seen my video? Has it occurred to anyone what exactly Baba wants to explain to us through this Leela. Baba took one's coin and did not even express his wish that the coin should be purified from Baba's hands and should return to my hands. It's in his mind. He hasn't even told his friend. Baba, knowing his inner feelings, returns the coin to him. And on other hand a man is asking that Baba give me that coin. On the contrary, Baba takes twenty-five rupees from him and says that even if stack pile of money, I will not return this coin. When Leela opens, an Ovi comes that Ovi is the Masterkey of this leela.If that Ovi is understood well then this story(leela) will unfold. And that's Chapter 29 Ovi no 162 manachya vritti kotya nu koti, tyagun okhati dharavi gomati Various types of evil thoughts lustful thoughts arise in our mind, selfish thoughts. But Baba says, first discard the wrong thoughts and cherish the good thoughts. This is what Ovi is saying. Then see Baba's leela. Baba remains in the heart of such a devotee twenty-four hoursin the proximity of him The feeling of the rupee sent by Captain Hatay was pure, his feeling was that if I get hold of this one rupee as a rupee has two sides, we call it head and tail. Similarly, that one rupee i.e. faith (Shraddha) and patience (Saburi) and if i get it then and if I get it, then if I worship it throughout my life, then I will get exclusive devotion to Baba. This good feeling was hidden in the mind of Captain Hatay unexpressed and Baba grasped his goodwill and returned the coin to him and Narvekar was watching it and Narvekar feels why he doesn't do this work staying in Shirdi. whereas a person from Gwalior has a wisdom to purify a coin from Baba's hand and keep it with himself. Why don't we Shirdikar have this much wisdom? why didn't we think of it staying close, let's do the same and give the coin. But what does he choose? On one hand, Ram Laxman and Sita, when seen from outside, it seems that there is no greater devotee than this great man Vamanrao Narvekar, but Baba knows the inner heart This Hatey leela is completely opposite to Wamanrao Narvekars leela. Chapter 29 Ovi no 177 'he jari mhanave nischit, tich paha dusri prachit' taking about narvekar 'ti to yahun viparit, jyache mnogat tya thave' So Narvekar's feeling was that if this coin gets purified from Baba's hand and comes into my hands, then there will be a lot of wealth in my house. And how can Baba increase our greed? So instead Baba did opposite. Okay, if you want this coin, give me twenty-five rupees. On the contrary, whatever greed he had within him, baba pulled it out in the form of twenty-five rupees. But that coin was not allowed to reach him. This is Baba. See, both leelas are same, both are giving coins, but one is getting returned with blessings and the other is negotiated for 25 rupees Flaunting how great devotees we are will not work in front of Baba. Baba is Omniscience .He is a true Sadguru. How can a lie work there? How will those false coins work? There is a couplet of Kabirji Man Maila Tan ujala 'mann maila tann ujala bagula kapto aangi' Have you seen the Heron? They are lovely white in colour. Do you know why people a simile of heron to devotee? Have you ever wondered why such simile to a devotee? One specialty of Bagula(Heron) is, if you pay attention, the heron stands calm in the water as if it is in a trance. It neither moves nor shakes. But what is the reason behind that samadhi (Trance)? Do you know he is looking for the fish under waters, his entire attention is on the fish. But as soon as the fish is seen, it immediately takes it in its mouth and hunts it. From the outside, it seems as if it is in a trance. So in the same way Narvekar Saheb found the coin with Ram Laxman Sita on one side and Hanumanji on the other side seems there is no greater devotee than him. But Baba is the omnipresent one. Knows everyone's feelings and intentions. 'mann maila tann ujala bagula kapto aangi taso toh kava bhala tann mann ekhi rang\" crow is better than it, at least the body and mind both are dark, there is no pretentious purity I wouldn like to show a scene. There is a film called Laila Majnu. Majnu, who is completely crazy about his Laila, is wandering from place to place.He is going somewhere in the desert calling Laila Laila. And a person is in the desert and perhaps it is time for Namaz, he is offering Namaz. In worship of Allah (God). This Majnu, who has become crazy about Laila, is going that way and does not realize that someone is sitting in Namaz. He is so much absorbed in love of Laila that he is not able to know who is sitting and who is doing what, he is not paying any attention, he is just chanting Laila And suddenly as soon as he passes in front of the person offering Namaz, he shouts, Hey Kafir! kafir is the one who is an Atheist Don't you see that I am sitting here for namaz. You don't even care that much. So what does Majnu answer? I will not say it with my own words, you can see the scene.Because that scene goes much deeper with this talk, please do watch carefully this scene. hey kafir don't you know that if a person is doing his prayers one should not pass in front of him majnu replies,\"i have overlooked myself in the love for laila so did the act of defiance but you were in the worship to god who is the creator of my laila then how did you remain conscious that someone crazy passed in front of you head is in prostration but the heart is preoccupied with thoughts of the world. my love is better than your worship This scene tells a lot that the head should be in prostration but if one cares about the world then how can prostration be done. So such prostration, such devotion, God does not want. Baba is omnipresent. Knows every layer of our soul. Know in detail. Knows our thoughts and knows our feelings And one whose feelings are pure, he is not only in their vicinity but always remains alert in them intrinsically and guides them. That's why the name of Leela I always say that Captain Hatay v/s Narvekar. I hope that this leela has been revealed to you. So, if our feelings are selfless, true and pure, then only we will be able to get closer to Baba's heart. The essence of this Leela: Through this Leela, it seems as if Baba is telling us that almost the whole world does my fruitful devotion only and I have no objection to it. Because every devotee starts with fruitful devotion. But that's just the beginning. If that fruitful devotion cannot be transformed into selfless devotion, then that devotion is worth a penny. It is fine in this world but it has no value in the spiritual world. Because selfless devotion is the first step in the spiritual journey. From there the spiritual journey begins. And through this Leela, He is also telling us that I do not see your external conduct, your show of sincerity, your devotional yoga, knowledge yoga and your meditation yoga. Rather, what the whole world cannot see, I can clearly see your intentions, your selfishness and your capabilities. Because if a desiring devotee continues to do all these yogas for millions of years even after taking millions of births, he will not be able to progress in the spiritual world. All these yogas are meant only to convert a eccentric devotee into a selfless devotee. Their efficiency increases the physical intelligence and their ineffectiveness reduces the physical intelligence And extinction of the body consciousness is pursuing me Or attaining enlightenment. Now the question is whether you want me or do you want something else from me. Narayan or Narayani Sena? Your desiring self worries me. Because even though you may not be aware of it, I know very well that it will one day prove fatal for you. In the end my heart says on this leela Kabirji couplet phal karan seva karen, karen na man se kaam, kahe kabir sevak nahi ,mange chaughana daam.",
    "Description": "Laila Majnu Scene (1976) \nhttps://drive.google.com/file/d/1YP0W... …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "7,160 views",
    "Likes": "422"
  },
  {
    "Title": "श्रेय या प्रेय.... जीवन बदलने वाली सत्संग हर एक शब्द ध्यान से सुनिये",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OpVYx8Osozk",
    "Transcript": "Om sai ram. Sadguru sai's truthful words, adhay 52 verse 171 This sai sathcharitra is not an ordinary scripture it is truly a kalpvrisksh (wish fulfilling tree), for those who have worldly desires to them it appears to be dry but to the seekers, it is deliverance, experience it for yourself in life when maturity ascends related to life then roads diverge in front of us one takes to shreya(ultimate good) and other takes to preya(pleasure) In this world 99.99% people choose the road leading to Preya (Pleasure). I again repeat in this world 99.99% people choose the road leading to Preya (Pleasure). 0.01% people choose Shreya. Now I am taking up a topic, Shreya (Ultimate good) and Preya (Pleasure), Adhyay 17 . Actually, in Saisatcharitra the topic in Adhyay 17 Shreya (Ultimate good) and Preya (Pleasure), and if you agree with me then I feel that this topic of should have been the in Adhyay 1 Shreya (Ultimate good) and Preya (Pleasure). Till such time you understand this topic it will not be clear to you that in life you always come across two paths and which path to choose. Whether you should choose Shreya (Ultimate good) or Preya (Pleasure). This important aspect of life Baba has kept it in Adhyay 17 and what is written about Shreya (Ultimate good) and Preya (Pleasure) is taken from Kathopanishad. Kathopanishad speaks at length about this Shreya (Ultimate good) and Preya (Pleasure). So, Adhyay 17 which is taken from Kathopanishad talks about Shreya (Ultimate good) and Preya (Pleasure). We take the verses one by one and they are all important verses. Please listen to each verse attentively. Shri Saisatcharitra, Adhyay 17 Shree Ganeshayana namah. Shree Saraswateha namah. Shree Gurubhyo namah. Shree Kuladevataya namah. Shree Sitaramachandrabhya namah. Shree SadguruSainathaya namah Gataadhyayi abhivachan, Ki ye adyayi hoil nirupan, Shreya ani Preyalakshan, Sadare Shravan te kije. In the previous Adhyay it was said that in the next Adhyay that is Adhyay 17 they will speak on Shreya (Ultimate good) and Preya (Pleasure) so now listen to it with respect and from your heart. Prakash ani Andkhar, jaise annoyavrutakar, Bhinaroop te paraspar, Shreya-Preya taya pari. It is said that light and dark, jaise annoyavrutakar, they move one after the other in circle. Bhinaroop te paraspar – both are different, light is different and darkness is different. As after day there is night and after night there is day, it is moving in a circle, similarly Shreya and Preya are moving continuously in a circle in our life. Bhinaroop te paraspar, Shreya-Preya taya pari. Verse 3 Preyarth jayache man dhave, Swarthapasav toh bhransh pave, One whose mind runs towards the Preya (Pleasure). Preyarth jayache man dhave, Swarthapasav toh bhransh pave. Because there is selfishness Preya (Pleasure), walking on the path of Preya (Pleasure) he will only stumble. He will only meet deception. Preya is that. Shreya te vivekroop ahe, Shreya (Ultimate Good) is about discrimination and Preya roop is indiscrimination. What is the difference between Shreya and Preya. Whenever we start understanding life then always two roads open up for us. One leads to Shreya and the other leads to Preya. In this world 99.99% people choose the road leading to Preya (Pleasure). I again repeat in this world 99.99% people choose the road leading to Preya (Pleasure). 0.01% people choose Shreya. Shreya is filled with prudence and detachment. Preya is filled with suffering and debauchery. Every person wants to enjoy and do not want to do penance and that is why every person is attracted towards Preya. Preya is liked and only Preya is thought about. We do not have the time to think about Shreya (Ultimate good). Mind loves Preya (Pleasure). This is because it is very easy to walk on the path of Preya (Pleasure). Preya is like waterfall from the mountain. If the water is falling down from the mountain, then is there any struggle, you tell me. The earth’s gravity pulls it downwards very easily towards the Earth. But if you have to take the same water up to the mountains then you need a motor, energy, electricity. Similar is Shreya (Ultimate good) and Preya (Pleasure). Preya is the feeling of enjoying life and those who see danger in this enjoyment, self-destruction in enjoyment, the one who gets the clarity that this Preya (Pleasure) will lead to destruction only such a person will think of Shreya. Only that one person will think about Shreya (Ultimate good). The rest 99.99% like Preya (Pleasure). They love Preya. Shreyacha visay kevalvidya, preyacha toh nikhal avidya – Subject of Shreya is knowledge. It does not look for momentary happiness. It thinks a lot about eternal bliss. Because momentary pleasure is momentary only. You enjoy momentarily and then it is time for punishment. This happiness is fatal for humans in two ways. If you get some happiness then the mind wants some more happiness. This is the two sidedness of the mind. If I do not get the happiness that I want then I go into depression and anxiety, my mood is off and the mind is scattered. If the wish is fulfilled then it gives birth to a even bigger desire. These are the signs of Preya. If one desire is fulfilled then there is a bigger desire. If that is also fulfilled then there is bigger desire. This seriality does not stop. The hunger increases. The thirst increases. If one wish is fulfilled then a bigger wish takes birth. If for some reason that wish is not fulfilled then that person gets depressed, stressed, anxious. This is Preya. That is why it is said that if a person gets freedom from his desires, he becomes God. This is an easy way to become God. Desires fall down. The one whose desires fall, the next moment he becomes God. Who has tied us to the level of Human? Desires, material enjoyments, luxuries and to experience these sufferings and luxuries money is needed and to earn that money lots of hard work is required. Take lots of efforts, earn crores of rupees and live a life indulgence. . 99.99% people come in this category. This is called Preya and .01% people think of Shreya. In our Satsang we will think about Shreya. We will not even think of Preya even in our dreams. There is whole life for Preya. So, this is the difference.99.99% people move towards Preya. Even if parents awaken the children forcefully in the morning, they do not wake him up saying that you have to complete Saisatcharitra study but to study and get good marks so that he passes with good marks, earn lots of money and then enjoy. There should not be any trouble in life of the child. They are in a way parents who are spoiling their children. Even if they want the child to take effort, they are taking them towards the perishables. Put efforts there, become a doctor, engineer. We will put in money, you work hard even though it is perishable, it is not eternal. But in this world how many such parents are there who feel that their child should find Baba? Very nice…Thank you…So those who feel that their child should not make the same mistake that they did, my child should not spend their earning money like me, I who has been dying for the perishable my child should not die for it. My child should move towards the eternal. I have drowned, my story is over but let me take care of my child. My child should go towards Shreya (ultimate Good), my child should not go towards Preya (pleasure). This does not mean that he should leave studies. Don’t misunderstand. I only want to say that Shreya is much higher than Preya. Studies are important, job is important but God forbid if it clashes with Preya but it does not even take a moment to drop into Preya. That is why I say that this Adhyay should have been the first Adhyay. But Shreya and Preya have come in Adhyay 17. Unless there is this clarity in life that in life two paths open up, one which takes towards Shreya and the other towards Preya. If someone does not realize this, then you can guess how low that life will be. After taking birth in human species if that person does not understand that the path, he is walking upon is the path of Shreya or Preya. Can there be more illusion than this? The person does not even understand that the path he has chosen is of Shreya or Preya. Shreyacha visay kevalvidya, preyacha toh nikhal avidya Preya kadhi na bhulavi sudnya – The one who is awakened to Shreya, Preya can never lead him astray. Preya can never trap him in its greed, if he is awakened. Preya kadhi na bhulavi sudnya, Shreya agnya navade – Shreya does not like ignorance. Shreya does not like to turn towards ignorance. They are opposite to each other. Preya thinks on how can it enjoy this mortal world and to indulgence in this perishable world, how can I earn more money. To earn more money will have to take a bigger Degree. Will have to become a doctor, engineer, will have to become a big politician, big actor only then will be able to earn big money. And what will he do after earning money? He will indulge, will wander, eat, drink, indulge what else? This is life! This is the purpose of life. This is Preya. Further he says in Verse 5 Jovari kanak-kaminihod, Indriyashi vishayanchi avad, Vivek Vairagya nahi jod, Preyachi goad tovari. Till such time there is attraction towards wealth and women, humans have two weaknesses money and lust, sexual desire. sexual desire. These two things are weaknesses of every human being. Even big Munis and Tapasvis were not spared of by these two things then how will an ordinary human be spared? Jovari kanak-kaminihod, Indriyashi vishayanchi avad, Vivek Vairagya nahi jod, Preyachi goad tovari. Here it tells what Preya is. In life those who are greatly attracted to wealth and lust, that is their purpose of life, earn lot of money, indulge and spend entire life in sex. Those who think this way are afflicted by Preya (Pleasure). He does not want to see anything beyond that, understand anything beyond that. And he earns only to indulge in his senses. There are five sense organ and it requires 5 sense objects to enjoy, speech, touch, form, taste and smell. He will earn as much money as he can to indulge in these five carnal desires. He will make big house, buy big car, will eat best of food. His life is limited to dining table and bedroom. He cannot go beyond that. He cannot think beyond that. He cannot go beyond that. One who is limited to bedroom and dining table is hit by Preya. He is stuck in Preya is what Baba says. He says Vivek Vairagya nahi jod – one who has no prudence of what is essential and frivolous, what is mortal and what is immortal, what is momentary happiness and what is eternal bliss, one who has no clarity of this in life, such a person is on the path of Preya. He has chosen Preya. 99.99 % people who are on this path this person is also a part of this. He has chosen Preya. Nirshirachi missal, tevi Preya Shreyachi bhesal, Nirshir means milk and water if you mix both, similarly Shreya and Preya have mixed with each other and both are in our mind, Shreya as well as Preya, the mixture of both is in our mind only. Jevi dugdh tevade nival, Seviti maral mansi The Swan takes only the milk from milk mixed with water and leaves the water. Similarly at every turn in life Shreya and Preya will stand in front just like milk mixed water. The one who is awakened, the one who understands Shreya (Ultimate good), the one who understands the eternal, the one who understands the heart of Sadguru, such a person when he comes to such junctures drops the Shreya and goes towards Preya. I will give you an example. I am undergoing financial crunch, I am financially low, there is scarcity of money, have to pay school fees, one child is ill, need to show him to a doctor. I need money but I am unable to understand how and from where to get money, I am only thinking of that. And I am sitting in my flat, my main door is open and there is a stranger who is passing by and whilst removing his handkerchief from his pocket he drops his purse I see that and I go there and pick up that purse. If my mind says that I need money today and Baba has mercy on me and he saw to it that the purse falls down in front of my eyes, Hail to you Baba then this is Preya. Inspite of all the difficulties if he runs and returns the purse to the stranger then this is Shreya. Then this is Shreya. At every turn of life Shreya and Preya will be there, you have to choose, select. What is Shreya ad Preya? Every time such a situation arises, then every such time Preya needs to be dropped. There is a song. Maybe many of you must have heard it Tumko dekha toh ye Khayal aya, Zindagi Dhoop tum ghana chaya. How many of you have heard this? Whatever I say will not be without purpose. There will be some insightful meaning. I will not bring anything without purpose. The lyrics of this song Tumko dekha toh ye Khayal aya, Zindagi Dhoop tum ghana chaya. What does he say further, Aaj phir dilne ek tamanna ki and whilst saying this he catches the heroine’s scarf, see the scene carefully. When he says Aaj phir dilne ek tamanna ki – means a desire has risen in my mind, a wrong emotion awaken, the mind wants to go towards Preya. When he says Aaj phir dilne ek tamanna ki he is holding the scarf and whist saying aaj phir dil ko hamne samajaya he drops the scarf, this is Shreya. I hope that you have understood what I am trying to say. If our clarity improves then we will see that divine light in everything in the world. We will see that goodness of the Master. Only mind needs to become pure. Then at every place you will search for goodness. You become a Swan and you will see divinity everywhere. You must have seen this song so many times, today you saw it from my perspective, now you will never forget it in your life. This is guaranteed. Now you will see this song from a different perspective whenever you see it. You will remember Shreya and Preya. You may not remember my talk but you will remember this scene. This is the impact. If you want to explain a subject, I believe that from wherever you get the light absorb it, spread the bag and pick it up. The life I have led, the way I understand life I keep the same in front of you. I hope my perspective becomes your perspective one day and you too will be able to see the world like me. It is such a small scene; with such clarity this song must have been picturized. See the expressions and leaving the Scarf at the right time aaj phir dil ko hamne samajaya he says this while dropping the scarf. What better explanation can there be of Shreya and Preya. Jevi dugdh tevade nival, Seviti maral mansi - If a person gets the strength to become a Swan, he gets the strength of finding goodness everywhere, he gets the strength to take goodness from every place, then that person becomes a Paramhansa. This is called Paramhansa. That is why Vivekanand’s Guruji’s name was Ramakrishna Paramhansa. It means his thought process is so clear and natural, that even if two things are mixed then he will pick up that which is right and that which is worth giving up is sacrificed very easily. Baba also says the same thing, have the same feeling towards all the religions. Love all the religions that are there in this world. The things that you feel are incorrect drop them like the Swan but whatever is good in that religion adopt it in your life. This what Baba teaches us. Become a Swan. And that is why all the religions are good if we are true to our religion. There is so much depth in the statement Sabka Malik Ek hai Verse 7 – Tevich je dheer budhimant, viveki ani Bhagyavant, Shreyasi keval lolangat, Preyashi vinmukh sarvadha. Those who are filled with patience, those who are filled with maturity, in whose life there is faith and patience, such people will be attracted only towards Shreya (Ultimate Good) and will always keep Preya (Pleasure) away from themselves. So, at every turning point in life, in every situation, every moment Shreya and Preya will keep coming in front and every time you have to drop the Preya and choose Shreya and keep moving ahead. The one who has this clarity in life understand that Sadguru’s Grace has happened. You have to know what is to be chosen and what needs to be dropped off. In life every time and at every step Shreya and Preya will come up. It is not that we talk about this in only Satsang, the moment you leave from here from that very moment Shreya and Preya will keep coming in front of you. These two paths will always be open and every time you have to drop the Preya and Shreya has to be adopted every time It is not about a single moment. Tech paha mandbuddhi, sharir-pashu-puta-dhan-manadhi, Yogashemachya logoniya nadi, Preya sadhiti ekale. Those who are retarded, in a way baba wants to say those who are mad, stupid Tech paha mandbuddhi, sharir-pashu-puta-dhan-manadhi They will take good care of their body, they will wear good costumes, use the best of the soaps, wear the best of dresses, always be dressed up. In Baba’s days there used to be animals but nowadays you have motor vehicles, keep big cars, be engrossed with the son 24 hours and spend entire life in earning money. After getting respect and honor fill yourself with arrogance and pride. One who lives like that and Yogashemachya logoniya nadi, Preya sadhiti ekale. Only earn money. What I said a while ago he will indulge, will wander, eat, drink, indulge what else? This thinking is Preya. Please listen attentively. Attitude of indulgence is so deep within us, today as I speak you maybe realizing that yes, I have that attitude. Otherwise, I have this attitude is not even realized. Yes, it is an affliction and I do not even realize it. What greater ignorance and illusion can there be? Shreya kay Preya Kay, gnyat zale jari ubhay, Taisachi ghrahanvyavasay, jari swayat purshashi. Even if you understand what Shreya and Preya is, they will come in at every step of life. Taisachi ghrahanvyavasay, jari swayat purshashi – we have the freedom to choose it, Master has given that independent intelligence. Tarihi prapt hota ubhay,Nivad karne avagad Vishay, if in reality such situation arises it is very difficult to drop the Preya and hold on to Shreya. Karuni mandabuddhivari jay, alangi preya tayasi – whose intelligence is not very sharp, does not have much discretion, does not have years of Satsang, if the intelligence is incomplete, if there is no sharpness of prudence, Preya (Pleasure) overpowers such a retarded person and takes the person towards Preya (Pleasure) is what he says. Saru Preya adaru Shreya, purusharth to hachi hoy, This is a very important verse. Please note it down in your heart. Saru Preya adaru Shreya drop the Preya (Pleasure) and respect Shreya (Ultimate Good) which means take Shreya into your life. purusharth to hachi hoy – and this is the object of human pursuit. This is the supreme purpose of human life. And the one who has no strength to drop the Preya and hold on to Shreya in life, such a person is not following the purpose of human life. That means that person is a woman is what he says. The one who is following the purpose of life is Man so a person who cannot drop the Preya and has no courage to embrace the Shreya is a woman even though has man’s body. That is why there are always fights that in this temple woman are not allowed, that temple does not allow entry to woman, women’s right etc that happens, this line clears who is a real Man. From this perspective in this world even 0.1% are not men, everyone is woman that needs to be accepted. Saru Preya adaru Shreya, purusharth to hachi hoy, Asata paymishrit toy, paychi gehi hansa jaisa. When milk and water are mixed just as the Swan takes the milk and leaves the water, similarly a true follower of the purpose of human life, a seeker, one who does sadhana when Shreya and Preya come, he correctly drops the Preya and selects Shreya and only that person is a Man. Even if she is a Woman if this quality is in a Woman, she is not a Woman but a Man is what is being said. I hope that after today who is a true Man and a true Woman is clear. All the arguments that happen about Man and Woman, Baba has given answer here. Why in some temples women are not allowed but the man who is going in the temple is he a man? I am saying that. From spiritual perspective things change a lot. A real Man is he who at every step in life, keeps dropping Preya and embraces Shreya with awareness. Only such a person is a Man. He is only Man in this world rest all are Woman. There is no need to take pride in being a Man. That Baba has cleared. There is no need for Woman to take rallies asking why they are not allowed in some temples. The men who are going there are also woman. There is no need to take out rallies. Shreya ani Preya he don, jari hi purushache Swadhin, Asamarth karaya he vivechan, Vivekhin Mandmati. At every step in life this Shreya and Preya come forward but selecting for one who is retarded and with no intelligence is very difficult. Shreya tea he kasat, Arambhi janile pahije nischiti, Mag yeta pratiband margat, pratikar sadyant karu ye. Firstly, a person has to know where there is Shreya, only spiritual path is path of Shreya and on that spiritual path, on that path of penance, on that path of sadhana whatever obstacles come, whatever hindrances come then they can be faced is what is being said. Mag yeta pratiband margat, pratikar sadyant karu ye – then you can confront it, it can be driven away. There will be obstacles. They did not leave Rama inspite of being righteous then will they leave us alone? Definitely there will be challenges when you select Shreya so you have to drop the obstacles and hindrances and hold on to Shreya. Yethech purusharth drushtipuda, yevoni take datta nidhada,When it is the time to select and even if it troublesome, the person who faces the troubles and embraces Shreya, walks on the path of Shreya, Mhanoni shreyarthchi kara zhagada karoni dhada buddhicha – The one who struggles for Shreya, lives for Shreya, dies for Shreya and such a supreme follower of purpose of human life is a Man in this world is what Baba says. These 14 verses of Shreya and Preya are very important verses. Those who are listening for the first time I hope that the subject is clear. If there is a child in the house and he is insisting on something, there has to be so much clarity that what he is insisting upon if given to him will push him towards the path of Shreya or Preya. The father and mother will have to think about this first and after that decide whether to give or not. This is so because they think that attachment is love and because the attachment to the son is so much, they do not think about Shreya and Preya. They keep on giving whatever is asked because of the attachment and there were no restrictions. They did not put the habit to the child of listening to a ‘no’. This is very dangerous for the child. The day he has to listen to ‘no’ that child will either commit suicide or he will fight with you and leave the house. In both the cases you would have destroyed the child because you did not put him the habit of listening to ‘no’. You did not say ‘no means no’. There are no brakes in the car. Tell me what will happen to that car? You kept giving him whatever he asked because you are attached to the child. You earned a lot; you have lots of money and you kept on giving whatever the child asked. Now he is habituated to getting whatever he has asked for. It is in your hands and you get it and give him that, you have spoiled him. Let’s say this boy loves a girl and he is after the girl and is crazy about her and hopes that she will say ‘yes’ to him. Because he is habituated to listen to ‘yes’. He has no habit of listening to a ‘no’. And the girl says I am not concerned with you and cares two hoots about him. Such children then go into depression and commit suicide. This is because we have never thought them to listen to a ‘no’. We have not put any brakes for the child. We gave him a car without brakes to drive so there will be nothing other than an accident. This is Shreya and Preya. In the 14 verses it is clarified it. It is an important part of Kathopanishad. That is why in Adhyay 53 verse 161 Baba says Vedantvishay ati gahan Vedant is very deep knowledge and that Baba has simplified it and put it in verses. Vedantvishay ati gahan, virakti-bhakti-gyan jod deun, Aisa granth karan nirman, gurukrupevin durgad These 14 verses have been taken from Kathopanishad and Kathopanishad is part of Vedant. Shreya and Preya. Think of your life as a tree. Earn money, whatever you are destined to enjoy, enjoy it, there is nothing wrong in it. But if the roots do not have spirituality, then that tree will not survive for long. Do you know when the tree is lush green and gives lots of flowers and fruits? When the roots are very deep. So, when in a person’s life the roots of spirituality are deep, if the roots are deep then its branches, leaves, fruits and flowers will grow in this world because the spirituality in the roots is alive and that is why that person will not get stuck. How much ever success he gets he will not be misled, will not go astray. But the roots which have no spirituality, no Shreya if such a person succeeds how much ever the tree is lush green because the roots are not strong it will not survive for long, it will collapse and fall. That is why in very person’s life compulsorily the roots of Shreya have to be strong then God can give him anything in the name of Preya it does not matter and even if he does not give that too does not matter. Because he has in his hands the original thing. He has in his hand higher things. Who and why anyone will see what he did not get anything of lower level. The one who has nectar why will he look towards the poison. Why does a person get stuck at lower level of happiness? This is because he has not touched the higher thing. And if has touched the higher thing and he is enjoying it and drinking the delight of unique devotion, why will he get stuck in these object indulgence. There is reason for that. But today object indulgence feels like happiness because there is something higher than this is not known. Th other day I gave this example today also I will give the same example. There are two children in one house. One child enjoys dining table and loves to eat and drink. Whatever the child asks it is given to him. If he wants non vegetarian food all 7 days then it is given. Mother gives him whatever he asks for. In the same house there is another child and he is insisted upon to eat but he is unable to eat, he does not relish it much, he does not enjoy it. Because he has touched something more subtle than this. He is interested in art, music, poetry, song. His enjoyment and indulgences have transformed from gross to subtle. He has gone beyond that. When he listens to some song, he likes it so much that the food is tasteless in front of that. He does not enjoy it. This is because he has touched something subtle. He has touched something better than gross which is pure. When he listens to some song then he gets lost in its lyrics. I showed you a film and your heart was filled with joy. If someone is looking at a song, music so very minutely, will such a person get stuck in gross desires. Will he like it? Master has taken him to such a high level that even if he is hit and made to eat even then he will not eat it I will give you, my example. In childhood I loved to see movies now it has reduced a lot. But I used to see a lot of movies. At that age in 4th, 5th standard in our colony it was a crime to see movies. My mother and father believed that it was a sin. Because my age children did not see any movies. But I was very fond of watching movies. So, if mother gave 10 paise or 25 paise in those times we got that much only. Today the children may not even know 25 paise or 50 paise. They give Rs 100 note saying take child. But in those times 25 paise, 50 paise was a lot. They used to give so that I go and buy something and eat. Other children with me enjoyed eating. They used to go and eat chocolates etc. but I was never interested in those things so I used to collect money up to 40 paise and save. And once 40 paise were collected there was theatre near our house called Vandana theatre and one could see a movie in 40 paise and I used to save money and sit in the theatre and watch movie without telling anyone. By God’s grace my health is fine now but, in those days, I was very thin. Being a child, my mother felt I should eat well, she used to bring fruits, cook meat and she used to try to feed me well. But I was not interested in eating. Because God had given something higher than food in the hand at the age of four. I used to go and watch and if in the film if I liked some scene which touched my heart, some song I liked and it touched my heart, why I am saying this is, one whose awareness has awakened and can see the subtle and understand it such a person cannot be interested in the gross. My mother used to serve fish fry, mutton and used to insist that I eat or I would be spanked. So many times, I have been beaten because I did not eat and if she went to the kitchen for a while I used to throw the mutton pieces out of gallery and say I have eaten. This was my childhood. But I was fond of movies. Because of this mother and father felt that I was getting spoilt. But they never understood what I saw in it. Later on, when I started doing the Satsang and mother understood that she has beaten him a lot in his childhood for movies. One day she fell at my feet and apologized and said that I never understood what you wanted to see, what you saw. I thought that watching movies was bad and you will get spoiled that is why I have beaten you so much. I have starved for 3 days for having seen the movie. Even then I did not give up on that habit. Why I am telling you all this is because one who gets touch of the subtle, he touches something better than he will not enjoy the gross. You can guess he who has acquired exclusive devotion will such a person get stuck in such gross desires? Psychologically after coming to better position the lowly things feel inferior. Music, poetry, good direction, good story if such things please the heart, then the heart is so happy then that day don’t feel like eating or drinking. The one who touches God’s devotion how will such a person get stuck in these desires. It is not possible. I said the other day also a person who is into music, poetry, painting and is busy in any such art have you ever seen such a person commit a crime. Have you seen such a person holding someone’s collar and fighting in the middle of the road. He cannot fight. It is not in his genes. He has risen above all these things. So, Shreya and Preya are this only. The subtler you get the gross keeps dropping. This Preya will keep dropping. But if you are not inclined towards subtlety then your life will begin at dining table and end in the bedroom. Then as Baba says in Adhyay 44 jivah and upast in these two things they will get stuck and die. They will eat good food, lust will arise and take them to bedroom and then it is food and bedroom, Jivah upast, in that life ends. They will not be able to rise beyond this. They will not be able to see the world beyond this. Life will end in these two things. Look carefully at life. Only these two things attract us. Why are you living? To eat. But there may be only one such sadhu, one such saint who eats to live. All of us live to eat. This is the difference. But till such time you get something higher in your hands these lowly things will not fall, will not drop. That is why if anyone shows any inclination towards art then please don’t stop the child. Instead give full support because he is moving from gross to subtle. Support as much as you can, be it music, poetry, shayari, painting. If he wants to enter the medium of arts then you give him full support as a parent, as a father, as a mother. Because subtle is many times better than gross as spirituality is closer from there. If the attraction of the world increases towards arts, music then the highest truth is closer from there. But from the gross world highest truth is very far. From the dining table divine is very far. Get up in the morning, breakfast is kept, it is afternoon what is afternoon meal, worry is only about that. This has become so routine and at night what will you have at night is this life? Don’t want to rise above this. Baba has by speaking on Shreya and Preya directed the world’s flow and world’s inclination at every turning point, at every step these two paths will unfold and every time Preya has to be dropped and Shreya has to be chosen. I am going to narrate a story so things will be clearer. It is said that the entire world that you see in the gross form this temple, Baba, this stage, that dense form which we are enjoying but Vedanta says that it is the shadow of the Divine. And Paramatma is the body. reversed. That Divine which you cannot see is the body and this world that we see is merely shadow of the Divine. Do you believe this. If you stand in sunlight, this body is my physique and my reflection is my shadow. Because I am dense that is why it is my shadow. But here it is reversed. The Divine that you cannot see is the body and that which you see is the world is only shadow. That is why it is said that as much as you may try to catch this shadow it you will never be able to touch it. When you leave this and turn your mind inwards, meditatively and search within then you will find the entire universe. I will tell a story which will clear this more. One day a father who is a potter is making a pot in his courtyard. There is a small child of 4/5 years. The morning sun is in its full glory. The child is playing in the courtyard. And the child’s shadow is in front of him. The child tries to touch the shadow. The more he moves forwards, the shadow moves further. The child gets worried. The more he moves forward, he still cannot touch the shadow. He wants to touch the head of the shadow. He tells his father that I see my head in the shadow I want to touch that. But I am not able to that. The father is working. He is a potter. He says Son no one has been able to touch the shadow you are unnecessarily trying to that. Leave it. You won’t be able to touch it. The more you move towards it, the shadow will go further ahead. But the child says no father the long head that I see in the shadow I want to touch that. At that moment a Fakir was passing by. Fakir listened to the conversation between the father and son Fakir was saying that this child was saying the right thing. Let me satisfy his curiosity. Fakir keeps his luggage outside and enters the courtyard. He asks the child do you want to reach the head in the shadow. The child asks will I be able to reach it. The fakir says yes. I do that work only. He lifted the child’s hand and put it on the child’s head and in the shadow, he was able to reach his head. Do you understand? He lifted the child hand and kept it on his head and it was so easy. He said the world is like this only. If you wander and try to take on the world, you will not get it in your hand. When you leave the world and dive within then this world will be yours. The one who runs behind the shadow is path of Preya and the one who dives within is the path of Shreya. That is completeness. There is a movie scene, I will play it so it will be clearer. I will tell a little about the scene so that you will be able to understand it better. . The name of the film is DDLJ, Dilwale Dulhaniya le jayenge. How many of you have seen it….many have seen it. I will tell a scene from the movie. There is a hero and he is love with a girl in London. But he does not express his love. Heroine comes to India, there is love but does not express it. After some days the girl gets engaged, there is marriage scheduled and the hero comes to India from London. Somehow, he manages to pose as a guest and enters the house. He meets the girl and the girl says my father has got me engaged to someone else, my father will never give my hand in marriage to you. You take me away from here. The heroine says to the hero that my father will never agree to our marriage you take me away from here to London. Later even the heroine’s mother comes to know that her daughter loves this boy. . She gives all the jewelry in hero’s hands and says that you elope with my daughter. You don’t know my husband; he will never agree to this marriage. When the heroine’s mother tells this to the hero, see the scene to know his answer. You will understand very well what Shreya and Preya is. Mother is telling the boy to elope with her daughter and gives all her jewelry in his hand, she hands over her entire life’s savings to him. He says that my mother always used to say that at every stage of life there will be two roads, one right and the other wrong. The wrong way will be very easy, in beginning you will get great happiness, you will enjoy a lot but at the end you will lose. But the right path, the path of Shreya in that probably at every step there will be difficulties, will have to face obstacles and hindrances but in the end you will win. Shreya and Preya are similar to this. If you chose Preya then there will be no struggle, no troubles, no obstacles, you will just blow away your life by enjoying it and at the end leave this world. If you embrace Shreya, live life of honor then you may face troubles at every step but in the end, there will be victory, you will shine in the world as a hero. Whoever has heard this Satsang, I believe that this topic has touched everyone’s heart. We will have to choose. We need to be aware very moment, where the senses are running, from where to bring them back, what is the mind thinking, you need to bring back the mind from there. This struggle is not of a moment, it is a moment-to-moment struggle Every time the mind will go towards the Preya, every such time you will have to pull it towards Shreya. This struggle is not of a second, an hour or a day, it is a struggle of entire lifetime. I had this Satsang and you heard it for some time and then you sweep it out, this cannot happen. You have to imbibe this in your life. When it comes to Shreya and Preya, there is such subtlety even in Gods. Once the war between the Kauravas and Pandavas is inevitable There is no other option for Kauravas and Pandavas but to start a war. Duryodhana and Arjun meet Balram also, just as they met Krishna. Balaram tells you both are my cousins so I will not fight this war siding anyone. You both are close to me and I will not fight with anyone. And they both leave. Actually, Duryodhana loves Balaram a lot He does not love but in way he cheats, respects a lot and always agrees with him and Balaram gets trapped in that for lifetime. And Balaram always supports Duryodhana even if he is wrong. In the end when the war is getting over Balaram comes running when Duryodhana is killed and Balaram says that you have killed him wrongly and I will never forgive you , then Krishna says to Balaram, brother when there was war between righteousness and injustice and when they came to take help from you that time you did not have the courage to choose the righteousness, Shreya. You had run away from the battlefield. Krishna says this to Balaram. Actually, you should have stood up for righteousness, like how I stood up for the Pandavas, you too should have stood up with the Pandavas. When it is about righteousness and injustice you have to drop injustice and hold on to righteousness. But under the influence of attachment, you did not take that decision. In the end Krishna says that all life long you never saw their mistakes and when both of them come to you asking for help you did not pay attention to righteousness or injustice and being impartial you went for pilgrimage Krishna says that when there is a war waged between righteousness and injustice in the battlefield then there is only one holy place that remains and that is battlefield. And that too you have to be on the side of righteousness and fight the war. There remains only battlefield. You cannot be impartial. See this scene also. When it is about Shreya or Preya then you need to go straight towards Shreya. If it is about righteousness and injustice then you cannot be impartial. Being impartial is equally wrong and is like embracing Preya or injustice. This is what he says and there is such depth to this. Even in our life there comes such times where we want to save ourselves, we want to be impartial. Who will get in the mess, forget it. But Krishna says that those who live their life like that they cannot embrace righteousness, Shreya. So, when both of them came to me I stood up for righteousness but brother you made a mistake. You did not stand up for righteousness, you wanted to be impartial but remember that when it is about righteousness and injustice and if you want to be impartial even then it will be called injustice. When it is about Shreya and Preya, you have to select Shreya only at any cost. All this makes it very clear that Shreya and Preya are subtle topics but if in life it becomes clear What Shreya and Preya is and you have to see it with awareness every moment. You will face it every moment. If I say whether this will go towards Shreya or Preya, have to decide on that in house, office society. Wherever you go this Shreya and Preya have to come along. You have to face it. You cannot get rid of this. 24x7 this Shreya and Preya will stand before you but 99.99% people don’t even know what this Shreya and Preya is. They live life of Preya and they sink into the earth with all the afflictions of Preya. Then they again come into this world with Preya and again live with Preya. There is no trace of Shreya. This is the reality of the world. That is why I say that this Shreya and Preya which has come in Adhyay 17 should have come in Adhyay 1. one which apprehends mind, overcomes bane and calamities, annihilates ignorance, bestows deliverance, the ultimate source of welfare, truth awareness and bliss giver mother of sai, direct form of sai, diadem of all scriptures, glory to shree sai satcharitra divine granth",
    "Description": "श्रेय या प्रेय.... जीवन बदलने वाली सत्संग हर एक शब्द ध्यान से सुनिये \n\n1. Tumko Dekha toh yeh Khayal Aaya :\nhttps://drive.google.com/file/d/1peib...\n\n2. Dil Wale Dulhaniya Le Jayenge Scene :\nhttps://drive.google.com/file/d/17T5W...\n\n3. Krishna Balram Sawad Mahabharat Scene :\nhttps://drive.google.com/file/d/1pLHD...\n\n#saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahaya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba #dashera #saibabapunyatithi #saibabavijaydashmi #saibabasamadhi #saigyan #saibabaprayer #saibabapreachings #saibabadialogue #saibabadivineteachings #दशहरा #साईबाबा #साईलीला #साईबाबासमाधी\n#shraddha #saboori #सच्ची श्रद्धा #rebirth #saibabareels #satyasai …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, saipooja, Saili Sagar",
    "Views": "17,056 views",
    "Likes": "664"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई के सारे चमत्कार केवल एक बूंद मात्र है उसके आगे ही,सारा समंदर है !!!",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rtiEMo8-MhA&pp=0gcJCSMKAYcqIYzv",
    "Transcript": "Miracle Miracle is such a thing that every person has experienced it at some point of time in his/her life, at least in the initial days spiritual practice. If I say that one cannot become a devotee of Baba without miracles, it would not be an exaggeration.So that is the status of miracle, Before I say anything about miracles, let us make this clear that Baba's miracle is recorded in every person's life, whether he is a great saint or an ordinary atheist, he experiences it in every person's life. There is no doubt about it. Because Baba's miracle is the miracle which turns an atheist into a believer in the first place.As it is said in the Aarti (nastikana hi lavishi nijbhajani) so miracles turn an atheist into a devotee of baba Miracles are not bad in themselves and if Baba is doing miracles then Baba has a deep philosophy behind them. He knows very well why he does miracles. But the problem is that when the form and essence of a miracle, the feeling of a miracle, if its importance increases beyond limits in my life, then it can even lead my life astray. If I keep seeing only Baba's miracles and if I am not able to take the light that Baba is giving behind that miracle, then those miracles can even lead me astray. So these are the basic things that would be better if it is clear. Now see, the life of every human being passes through four stages First of all, no matter who a person is in this world, he is first of all an atheist. He does not have faith or devotion in God or Goddess, he is an atheist. Baba's miracles turn such atheists into believers. So the one who became a believer means that he has passed the first stage and reached the second stage. Now when he becomes a believer of Baba, he starts worshiping Baba, he gets some miracle in his life, Baba does such a thing in his life that he comes in the devotion of Baba, and he becomes a devotee of Baba. The purpose of Baba also remains the same that first one must have faith in Me, trust in Me must be established in one's heart and life, that is why Baba works on miracles. But as soon as Baba performs miracles like, if he rescues someone from the biggest trouble or fulfills someone's biggest wish, then this is the only thing that turns an atheist into a believer and makes him a devotee of Baba. And then after reaching the second stage, he starts worshiping Baba, he likes to hear about Baba, he likes to know about Baba's activities, he likes to talk about Baba, then automatically connection with the world to some extent gets cut off and he starts moving towards Baba. His inclination towards Baba starts increasing And then Baba takes advantage of that state at that time and Baba starts filling his heart with some light from His heart, some reality is being unfolded, importance of this world and body is delved and that atheist then believer then a devotee starts taking light from Baba, tries to understand baba's innermost being starts understanding Baba's heart, starts understanding Baba's will, then he becomes a good disciple from a good devotee. Meaning, from an atheist to a believer, from a good devotee to a good disciple disciple means he starts to understand that my will has no value, the will of the Sadhguru will of my baba i should first know and I should mould my life accordingly. And then for the sake of his wish (Baba's), even if I have to destroy the entire existence, then it should be destroyed but his will should remain alive. The day when the journey of an atheist reaches to be a good disciple and that disciple, when he reaches the stage of self offering of Nav vidha Bhakti then for the sake of the will of my Sadguru, even if the entire existence has to be destroyed even i'm ready to erase my existence After that disciple reaches this stage, the Sadguru does not take time to bless him. Then Sadhguru gives his full energy and power and takes him the same place as he himself is.He who is Parabrahma himself bestows the title of Parabrahma on his disciple also. If you ask me what is a true miracle then this is the biggest miracle. The journey started from an atheist and he himself became Sadhguru. He himself became the hero of the universe.(Brahmand Nayak) So if we look at it from Baba's point of view, what is the value of a miracle, then this is what. He sees when He looks at an atheist, Baba has seen the hidden hero of the universe (Brahmand Nayak) within him and then he is continously working on him and then guiding him one by one. Bringing him forward from the first step and making him like himself.Like it comes in the Third chapter (Sai Satcharitra) that when he sees any devotee, he says that when a devotee remembers a Sadguru, thinks about him, does his sadhana, meditates on him, then he becomes similar to Sadhguru. Further Baba says that even similar word indicate a difference between them. Even similar words do not please me. Guru and disciple becomes one, just as two lamps, when they meet, are called one lamp. Just as a river meets the ocean, it is called an Ocean. Similarly, when this good disciple merges with the sadguru then he is called sadguru. So I would say that this is the biggest miracle. It may take some years for some, some may take several births, but Sadhguru is behind that person and his aim is to take that person there, if seen from his point of view, then this is a miracle. we see that whether it is social media or books being written about Baba, hundreds of channels on youtube talk about Baba, that miraculous aspect of Baba is brought into more light and see, it is natural to happen. Because when a devotee is completely new and joins Baba, then Baba definitely performs miracles in his life. Such miracles are absolutely necessary for new devotees and Baba performs miracles in the lives of new devotees only. As the devotee's inner circle starts expanding, his mind starts getting purified, then miracles fall and then he starts coming face to face with Baba's light. Then there is no value left for a miracle in that person's life. Because in the beginning, that miracle is important and no one can deny it. But Baba says that my miracles are in the initial stage, but as he is filled with light, the interest for miracles gradually fades off, till a time comes when he shuns looking miracles. rather he looks at Baba's heart to see what His wish is, then he moulds his life by knowing Baba's heart and knowing His wish.So in the beginning that miracle is mandatory in the life of a good devotee. There is no doubt about it. But as the depth of sadhana increases, the person does not even realize when the miracle falls and he starts bathing in Baba's light, So this is another aspect. But what is the problem that today the social media, channels and books mostly highlight those aspects of Baba. That is a miracle! And in reality if seen from that perspective, those who have been worshiping Baba for years, who have matured, have been worshiping Baba for years or have spent a long time in His devotion, it is their responsibility to worship Baba and spread babas's light everytime to the society. Not a miracle because a miracle can only take them to Baba's court, can enable them to participate in Baba's court, but the spiritual journey ahead cannot be done on the basis of miracles alone. Its not the case that Every channel shows only the miracles of Baba, their are few good channels also. there are some people who tell about Baba, their feelings are clearly visible, with such pure intentions, there are few channels also. There are some good books, we are not against them, but if more such channels comes, to spread about Baba's light, Baba's heart, Baba's soul, if we can reach it to the coming generations, then perhaps we can be called true devotees of Baba. There are many people who have been worshiping Baba for a long time but are still stuck in miracles. For such people, only the miracles of God and the fruitful devotion of God are done. Example is given about them like a dog, Dog has great love for meat, if he puts a piece of meat in his mouth, He eats whatever meat is available first and eats it with great relish. But later, when the meat gets over, then in the desire to get the taste of meat from the piece of bone, it starts chewing the bone. While chewing bone, blood starts flowing from the jaw and it drinks the same blood thinking its a meat of the bone. Then such becomes condition of a good devotee. Baba cannot perform miracles always in one's life. It is impossible. Because if my hunger for miracles increases too much then I will never look towards the light/wisdom And the day I stop getting those miracles, I might go into depression or become an atheist again. Then there is every kind of danger. Because Baba cannot perform miracles as per my wish throughout my life. Just not possible. But still man does not lose hope. What am I saying that Baba cannot do miracles throughout life. This is the experience of all of us. We are all going through experiences. In the initial phase, it seems as if Baba spreads the carpet of flowers in front of us. And forces us to walk on it. It seems that everything is going as per our wish. Baba is doing as I want, in that stage there is the initial stage of spiritual practice of life, then Baba gives that carpet to the devotee, but after reaching baba says in Twenty-Ninth chapter (Sai Satcharitra) Ovi says chalu jata kathilya vate, arambhi arambhi god vate,mag jethe tethe pasarthil sarate, katech katech chohikade Baba openly says that even if I have done miracles in your life in the beginning, but in the future, if I have to test you, I will keep you on trial So when throns are seen Then the devotee wonders where Baba takes him to the wrong path. Further, Ovi also says that the faith of a person gets shaken. Then further Baba also says that I knowingly bring these troubles into your life and test them so that you can become gold, become Kundan and come out of that fire..I am the one who lays those thorns. The one who spread the flower carpet in the beginning is also Baba, later the one who spread the thorns is also Baba. Until we understand things. And that just a highlight, one aspect of life. He also does miracles by coming down to our level in the initial stage. Actually, he spreads a carpet of flowers in the initial days but he cannot spread flowers throughout his life. He cannot perform miracles as per my wish throughout life. Because his main aim is to make my mind free. His main objective is to make the soul within me the hero of the universe, Shiva. So if we look at it, miracles are necessary in the initial stages, but as the sadhana increases, that desire for miracles, it should leave the mind of the devotee, so that our love for Baba's light increases, and understand his will what he wants. I would say this personally, if the biggest miracle in the world I would say that knowing his will. First of all, it is His wish, what He wants from me and if I can mold my life accordingly, recognize the marks of His footsteps and could walk unto it, then no miracle can be greater than this. The reason for getting caught in miracles is fruitful desires. Why does a man give so much importance to miracles? Why does those miracles in his life matter so much? Because there is desire in life and we have selfish devotion towards Baba. So it is natural that our inclination towards miracles will never die. If you ask me maximum number of people in the whole world utilize Baba as a ladder to enjoy the world. Even if we worship Baba, we do so with desires for the world. We also worship Baba, we revere Baba with the want of world, we want the worldly pleasures, we want all the blessings of the world. We use Baba as a ladder. And the destination for us is the world. But Baba says in the entire Sai Satcharitra that you should make the whole world a ladder so that you can reach the destination i.e. SaiBaba. So I am your destination, so don't climb on my shoulders to touch the world with the desire of that world. Rather reach me by climbing on the shoulders of the world. If we can understand this philosophy and the pain of Baba's heart, then Saibaba is not only a miraculous saint but also a Sadguru. He does not just perform miracles, if we call him SamarthSadguru, His main objective is one thing that comes up in the Twenty-Seventh chapter.(Sai Satcharitra) Baba gives the example of a patient and says that when a patient goes to a doctor, first of all he asks for jaggery something sweet and unless you keep that sweet thing, he will not take the bitter medicine. So in the same way Baba also performs miracles in our lives, first but His purpose is to give us bitter herbs to drink later. On this I have remembered a couplet of Kabirji. (Mitha Mitha sab kahe mitha sab koi khay kadva neem na pivasi sabhi rog mit jaye) These are some of the subtle nuances if we understand them. We have understood the difference between miracle and light. Miracle is important but its aspect which is its role, Its a small role in the initial stage of starting, at that point that role ends, after that if anything is left then only light. We will have to accept the fact that there is no one who will do miracles with us throughout our life, this is the bitter truth. Because whether you accept this bitter truth or not, it is there. But if I accept then at least I will not be a victim of depression in the future due to my wishes not being fulfilled. These are some of the details, if we accept them then perhaps our life will be simple and meaningful .Very nice Krishnaji, very beautifully told. Jai Sairam The essence of this statement is clear that there is no Salutation (Namaskar) without a miracle.(Chamatkar) But without light, miracle is a sweet poison. There is as much difference between a miracle and a vision as there is between livelihood and light. If a miracle does not give a person the knowledge of faith then that miracle is not a miracle, it is just a magic. If a Sadguru cannot make a indulgent a Yogi, then that Sadguru is not a Sadguru, he is just a magician. When in the beginning everything happens as per our wish then that miracle is only an illusionary miracle. At the same time, when Sadhguru awakens in us the sweetness of extinction, that is actually the real encounter of the true Mayapati. And now in the end the importance of a miracle is only as much as the status of salt in food. There are many places beyond the threshold of God, do not stop at the threshold. Every miracle of Sadhguru is the mother of faith. Every miracle means light, not livelihood.",
    "Description": "साई के सारे चमत्कार केवल एक बूंद मात्र है उसके आगे ही,सारा समंदर है !!!\n\n#saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahaya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba #dashera #saibabapunyatithi #saibabavijaydashmi #saibabasamadhi #saigyan #saibabaprayer #saibabapreachings #saibabadialogue #saibabadivineteachings #दशहरा #साईबाबा #साईलीला #साईबाबासमाधी\n#shraddha #saboori #सच्ची श्रद्धा #rebirth #saibabareels #satyasai …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, saigeeta, saisagar, saipooja, Saili Sagar",
    "Views": "10,129 views",
    "Likes": "553"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई सच्चरित ग्रंथ के बिना साई का हर मंदिर खंडहर हैं... Shirdi Sai Satsang (15 April 2023)",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=50vSlL5bJuI",
    "Transcript": "ओम साइन राम सतगुरु साइन के सत्य वचन अध्याय 50 क्रमांक 178 यह जग मायावी बाजार है यहां असली नकली वास्तु अपार है असली समझ कर नकली खरीदने वाले ग्राहक यहां बेशुमार है जी मकसद से साइन सच्चरित्र की रचना हुई है क्या वो पुरी हो रही है नहीं हो रही है अरे काम से काम है ना राम के भक्ति जो है और रामायण जानते तो हैं रामचरितमानस का पाठ तो करते हैं लेकिन हमारे यहां तो लोगों के पास साइन चरित्र पढ़ने के लिए समय नहीं है [संगीत] [संगीत] राम जी की आराधना करना बहुत आसन है राम जी को मंदिर में बिठाकर के पूजा करना बहुत आसन है साइन बाबा का मंदिर बंद लेना बहुत आसन है बाबा को पूज्य स्थान पर बिठाकर के बाबा की आर्तियां करना बाबा की पूजा करना बहुत आसन है लेकिन बाबा का उपदेश को मां करके वैसा जीना बहुत मुश्किल है राम के जैसा जीना बहुत मुश्किल है क्योंकि हम वैसा जी नहीं पाते हैं राम जैसा इसलिए आसन तरीका ढूंढ लिया उनको भगवान बना करके मंदिरों में बिठा दिया की आप भगवान मैं इंसान मैं बाकी मांगता रहूंगा तुम देते रहो मेरा मानना मेरा काम है देना तुम्हारा काम है यह सौदाबाजी कर लिया हमने हकीकत में अगर रामजी जो रास्ता दिखाए राम जी ने जो आचरण दिखाए अगर वैसा जी सकें तो हर हृदय में राम जी अवतरित हो सकते हैं राम जी कहानी बाहर से नहीं आएंगे अल में रामायण के रचना हुई थी की इंसान राम जैसा आचरण करेगा राम जैसा जीवन जिएगा ये सद्भावना से डेफिनेटली वाल्मीकि जी ने रामायण के रचना की होगी लेकिन हम लोग बड़े स्मार्ट हैं हमको आसानी दिखाई दिया उनके मंदिर बांधने में उनकी पूजा करने में क्योंकि एक बार मंदिर में उनको बैठा दिया की फिर बीच में बहुत बढ़िया आप ए गई आप भगवान मैं इंसान मैं पूजा करता रहूंगा मैं मांगता रहूंगा आप देते रहिए इसमें क्योंकि सुविधा है ना राम जैसा आचरण करने में बड़ा मुश्किल काम है और इंसान की यह फितरत रही है हमेशा से ही जी मकसद से रामायण के रचना हुई है क्या वाकई में वह मकसद पुरी हो रही है क्या वह पुरी हो रही है नहीं हो रही है अरे काम से काम है ना राम के भक्ति जो है वो रामायण जानते तो हैं रामचरितमानस का पाठ तो करते हैं लेकिन हमारे यहां तो लोगों के पास साइन सच्चरित्र पढ़ने के लिए समय नहीं है कल मैंने बोला था की वैलिड बॉक्स में जो भी क्वेश्चंस हो तो दाल दीजिएगा कहानी हमारे शायद पंडाल में तेलुगू लोग भी बैठे हैं उनको हिंदी मेरी समझ में नहीं आई है लेकिन फिर भी वो लोग ये सत्संग में बैठे हैं और काम से काम साथ या आठ लोगों का रिक्वेस्ट आया है की आप प्लीज वो मंच से बोल दीजिए इतना की डेड साल से हम लोग साइन सच्चरित्र ग्रंथ के लिए रिक्वेस्ट कर रहे हैं संस्थान से हर बार वो लोग बोलते हैं की प्रिंट में है प्रिंट में है प्रिंट में है आप काम से काम दीजिए ऐसा करके काम से काम आठ लोगों का मतलब लेटर आया है मेरी गुजारिश है जो लोग संस्थान के बाद पहुंच सकते हैं प्लीज क्योंकि अगर चरित्र नहीं है तो बाबा नहीं है यह सच्ची मानव स्मारक मैं फिर आऊंगा वह अगर चरित्र नहीं है चरित्र के प्रति अगर आपके आस्था हिल गई है आपने अगर चरित्र को हल्के में ले लिया है तो बाबा का ही क्रोध का करण बन जाएंगे हम लोग क्योंकि बाबा के हाथ में ही आपने खत्म कर दी खाली यह दीवारों खड़ा करके क्या पाएंगे आप भले ही मेरी बात का बड़ा लगे दोबारा मेरे को यहां पे वो लोग अगर बोलने का मौका ना दे तो ना सही कोई फर्क नहीं पड़ता लेकिन यह बात सच है की मैं बोल रहा हूं मेहरबानी करके डेड साल से 7 महीने से मराठी नहीं है ऐसी कैसी व्यवस्था को इतने हल्के में कैसे लिया है और अगर साइन सच्चरित्र का प्रचार प्रसार अगर आप नहीं करते हैं तो एक वक्त आएगा यह श्री कुछ अलग नजर आएगी मेरी यह बात को ध्यान से सुना प्लीज बहुत गंभीर विषय है और बाबा को फर्क नहीं पड़ता है आज 5 लाख लोग ए रहे हैं कल को 50 लोग भी आएगा ना तो बाबा को कुछ भी फर्क नहीं पड़ेगा क्योंकि बाबा लोकेशन का शिकार नहीं है बाबा को कुछ भी फर्क नहीं पड़ेगा लेकिन हम ग्राम वीडियो को उसका बहुत फर्क पड़ेगा हमारी रोजियान चलती हैं बाबा का अगर प्रचार प्रसार नहीं होगा लोगों तक बाबा पहुंचेंगे कैसे आएंगे लोग शिरडी आप मुझे बताइए आप मैं बोलना हूं ना आप सर्वे कीजिए ना आपको पता चल जाएगा दो-चार साल पहले कितने लोग आते थे आप कितने लोग ए रहे हैं इतना दूर लक्ष्मी को लेकर निंदनीय है साहब प्लीज डेड साल से तेलुगू नहीं है इस तरह से संस्थान चलेगा मैं फिर बोल रहा हूं आप शायद आपको बड़ा लगे आप मुझे दोबारा यह मंच ना दे कोई बात नहीं लेकिन मैं जो बोल रहा हूं आप प्लीज ध्यान से सुनिएगा क्योंकि बाबा जी दिन नाराज हो गए ना चीज बादल जाएगी और बाबा का नाराज का करण नहीं बन्ना चाहिए आज आपको ऐसा ग रहा है की सब ठीक चल रहा है लेकिन बाबा की मर्जी शामिल नहीं है साहब इसमें क्योंकि बाबा की मर्जी साइन सच्चा है और अगर उनकी रोशनी ही नहीं जाएगी उनका प्रचार प्रसार ही नहीं होगा तो एक दिन बहुत बड़ा खतरा है इस बात को जितना जल्दी गंभीरता से लिया जाएगा उतना बेहतर है और मैं संस्थान के खिलाफ कुछ नहीं बोल रहा हूं मेरी प्रार्थना है क्योंकि यह कोई छोटी बात नहीं है और ग्रंथ में हमेशा हम लोगों ने हर बार कहानी गलतियां दिखाई हैं की बार-बार ये प्रिंटिंग मिस्टेक होते हैं बार-बार इतना बड़ा लिस्ट बनाकर के बेचते हैं की प्लीज आप एक मिस्टेक्स मत कीजिए यह ग्रंथ है लोगों तक गलत मैसेज जाएगा लेकिन नहीं वापस अगली बार वैसे ही क आता है तकलीफ होती है हल्के में लिया है ग्रंथ को संस्थान ने बहुत हल्के में लिया है खामियाजा भुगतना पड़ेगा बहुत हल्के में लिया है ग्रंथ को हो सकता है मेरी बात का बहुत बड़ा लगे हो सकता है मुझे दोबारा यहां पर बोलने का मौका ना मिले कोई फर्क नहीं पड़ता क्योंकि लोकेष्ठा के लिए बातें करता हूं मैं जो हकीकत है वह है बड़ा लगा तो बड़ा लगा लेकिन अगर सच मां कर के बदलाव लेट हैं एक ऐसा कमेटी बीते जो बहुत सटक है ग्रंथ को लेकर के छपाई में मिस्टेक ना हो प्लीज प्लीज दादा आपके सामने मैंने फोन करके बोला था अभी उन्होंने छपाई का छपाई के लिए ऑर्डर किया है लेकिन मैं आपके सामने तेलुगू वाले भक्ति को मैं एवं आपने जल्द से जल्द बल्कि 3 महीने के अंदर उनके हाथ में आएगा या मैं आपको वादा करता हूं और महाराज की जय और बाकी सहित चरित्र भी जल्द से जल आएगा यह मैं आपको वादा करता हूं इसीलिए मैं कल पर्यटन करता हूं की कल किसी संस्थान का ऑफिसर को यहां पे लेक आता हो और उनके मध्य से फिर आपको मैं इसका आश्वासन दे सकता हूं प्लीज थैंक यू बहुत-बहुत शुक्रिया [संगीत]",
    "Description": "साई सच्चरित ग्रंथ के बिना साई का हर मंदिर खंडहर ही हैं...\n\nShirdi Sai Satsang \nDate - 15 April 2023\nSession - 02\nVenue - Shri Sai Ashram Satabdimandap, Shirdi\n\n#saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahaya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba #dashera #saibabapunyatithi #saibabavijaydashmi #saibabasamadhi #saigyan #saibabaprayer #saibabapreachings #saibabadialogue #saibabadivineteachings #दशहरा #साईबाबा #साईलीला #साईबाबासमाधी\n#shraddha #saboori #सच्ची श्रद्धा #rebirth #saibabareels #satyasai …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "neem ke patte, sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, rebirth, saibabarebirth, sai baba ka punar janam, sai punarJanam",
    "Views": "4,999 views",
    "Likes": "342"
  },
  {
    "Title": "A wonderful question by a lady in Shirdi Satsang...",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qu4zJYzK7bc",
    "Transcript": "As is the vision so is the creation. If the vision is clear, pure and holy then the world is also holy. If the vision is impure then the world will also become impure. Om Sai Ram. Firstly, I would like to give you millions of thanks. The Spiritual journey you have told, I liked it so much and the Kakad aarti song that we heard what I feel is that before we set out on the journey, the Kakad aarti should come from within and there is no need of bath, this Sai Leela Satsang itself is holy, after listening to it carefully, our journey will be completed. Thank you, Sister. I have a question. I have been reading Sai Satcharitra, in Adhyay 49 there is an incident. Now you told us that there is Ravan within us. In that incident Ravan had also come inside Nana Saheb. Right. Woman in Barkha, that was about beauty. We know about greed for money etc. Whenever I come to this part I stop. In spite of this happening the answer given by Baba, please explain to me that. I understood. I will take up the leela. She has picked up a very important leela. You have to thank her because a thing that is going to open up it’s going to blow your mind. In Adhyay 49 there is a leela of Nana Saheb Chandorkar. Nana Saheb Chandorkar was one of the close devotees of Baba. Nana Saheb Chandorkar and Dasganu Maharaj played an important role in promoting and spreading Baba name. Now such a person is sitting in front of baba in Dwarakamai and a Muslim lady comes with her family for taking Baba’s darshan in Dwarakamai. They had so much faith in Baba. In those days they used to wear Burkha and today also some wear it. She comes wearing a burkha. She is very beautiful. She lifts her veil for touching Baba’s feet. Then she immediately wears the veil and during that time Nana Saheb Chandorkar sees the beauty. At that time Nana Saheb Chandorkar’s age was above 60 years. In a way he is on the threshold of old age and even in that age in Nana Saheb Chandorkar’s mind lust awakens. Instead of lust let’s say it is attraction for the opposite sex and he thinks if she were to lift her veil one more time, he would again get to see the beauty. And the height of this is that all this is happening in front of Baba. Brahmand Nayak is sitting in front and all these thoughts are running in his mind. And that too in the mind of a person who is above 60. In his mind he seeks an option of what if she lifts the veil one more time and I see it one more time. Baba says oh Nana, these are Baba’s words, if the door in front is open then why do you want to enter through backdoor. If you want to see then see with your eyes wide open. Why you cannot do so is because your mind is disturbed. If your mind was pure, if there were no negative desires then you would have seen that beauty with wide open eyes and would have thanked God saying God if your creation is so beautiful then how beautiful you must be! But there was a feeling of seeing with a sneaky eye. That is why Baba says if the door in front is open then why do you want to enter through backdoor. Baba says that this world is very holy, abundant, beautiful only your vision has to be clear and mind pure. Then there is no need to be afraid or to steal glances, you can see the beauty with open eyes and can praise it. Going further Baba also says if that God has created such a beauty is it to close one’s eyes. He says see the beauty with open eyes and praise it as much as you can but let not bad desires arise in your mind. Actually, the problem is with the mind and you are closing the eyes. What did the eyes do? Let eyes do their work. But if you control your mind then whatever the eyes see, it will see with a very sacred feeling. This is the depth, Sister. That is why Baba says that if the front door is open, and your mind is pure and holy, that is till such time the mind is not holy then your vision will also be blurred. How much ever you try to control the sense organs, it will see wrongly, hear wrong things. That is the work of sense organs. Even after the suppression of senses, suppression does not happen, then you have to start working on your mind. If the mind becomes still once, if mind becomes sacred then these sense organs wherever they see they will see only God. There is a story. It is Shivaji Maharaj’s story. In olden times he was always at war with the Mughals, many times the Muslims had done bad things with our mothers and sisters. Once Maharaj’s soldiers pick up a Muslim woman who is very beautiful and bring her to Maharaj’s court and tell Maharaj to make her his Queen. But Maharaj being Maharaj and that is why he is revered even today. He says Mother you are so beautiful; had I been born from your womb I would have been so beautiful. As is the vision so is the creation. If the vision is clear, pure and holy then the world is also holy. If the vision is impure then the world will also become impure. There is so much depth in Nana Saheb Chandorkar’s story. He says that if the front door is open then there is no need to take an entry through the back door. If the mind becomes pure and holy then whatever you see, you will see openly without any fear, and restlessness in the mind. You will not steal glances, or look away. You will look straight ahead and boldly. There is no harm in seeing beauty, evil lies in the turmoil of the mind. This is what it is trying to say.",
    "Description": "An amazing question by a lady at Shirdi Satsang...\n🌟 Shri Sai Satcharitra | Chapter 49 | Amazing Episodes and Spiritual Secrets 🌟\n(Jaisi Drishti, Vaisi Srishti – A Deep Spiritual Insight)\nIn this special video, Shri Krishna Ji delves into a unique and mysterious episode from Chapter 49 of Shri Sai Satcharitra.\nThis episode not only highlights Sai Baba’s compassion and teachings, but also presents a very profound spiritual principle – “As is the vision, so is the creation” – in a simple and precise way.\n🔹 Find out in this video:\nWhat was the secret behind the amazing question asked by a lady at Shirdi Satsang?\nThe meaning of the divine leela of Chapter 49 and the spiritual inspiration derived from it.\nMysterious Quotes of Sai Baba: “If the front door is open, why come from the back?” — To whom and why were they said?\nHow is restraint over senses and control over mind possible?\n\nHow does Sai Baba's teachings bring about a change in perspective?\n\nHow can this episode become a life changing experience for seekers?\n\n🌼 This video is extremely useful not only for Shri Sai's lovers but also for all seekers who wish to understand and see life from a spiritual perspective.\n\n🙏 Understand this profound subject with Shraddha and Saburi and move one step ahead in your inner journey.\n\n📌 If you like the video, please Like, share your experience in the comments and Subscribe to the Channel.\n\n🔔 Press the Bell Icon to get notification for new videos.\n\n#SaiBaba #ShirdiSaiBaba #SaiSatcharitra #Adhyay49 #SpiritualWisdom #BhaktiMarg #Adhyatm #SaiKripa #JaisiDrishtiVaisiSrishti\n\n🌟 Shri Sai Satcharitra | Chapter 49 | A Divine Incident and Spiritual Secret 🌟\n(Jaisi Drishti, Vaisi Srishti – As Is Your Vision, So Is Your World)\nIn this enlightening video, Shri Krishna Ji offers a deep and insightful exploration of a profound incident from Chapter 49 of the Shri Sai Satcharitra.\nThis sacred episode not only reveals Sai Baba’s boundless compassion and wisdom but also sheds light on a subtle yet powerful spiritual principle:\n“As is your vision, so is your creation.”\n🔹In this video, discover:\nWhat was the extraordinary question asked by a woman during a satsang in Shirdi?\nThe inner meaning and spiritual message behind the divine leela of Chapter 49.\nThe deeper significance of Baba's mysterious words:\n“If the front door is open, why enter from the back?” — who was this said to, and why?\nHow to develop control over the senses and mastery over the mind.\nHow Baba's teachings transform our perception and change how we see the world.\nWhy this incident can become a turning point in a seeker's spiritual journey.\n🌼 This video is a true source of inspiration for all spiritual aspirants, offering guidance for inner growth and strength to face life’s challenges with a positive and elevated perspective.\n🙏 Approach this discussion with faith and patience, and take a step forward in your inner spiritual journey with Sai's grace.\n📌 If you find this video meaningful, please Like, Comment with your reflections, and Subscribe to the channel.\n🔔 Don't forget to press the Bell icon to stay updated with upcoming spiritual content.\n#SaiBaba #ShirdiSai #SaiSatcharitra #Chapter49 #SpiritualWisdom #BhaktiPath #SaiTeachings #InnerJourney #JaisiDrishtiVaisiSrishti\n\n⏱️ Chapters:\n00:00 – Introduction\nWelcome and overview of Chapter 49’s spiritual depth and mystery.\n01:30 – The Woman's Question in Shirdi Satsang\nWhat was the remarkable question asked by a woman, and why was it significant?\n03:10 – The Unique Leela of Chapter 49\nA divine incident unfolds — Sai Baba’s subtle way of teaching higher truths.\n05:00 – \"If the Front Door is Open, Why Enter from the Back?\"\nUnpacking Baba’s cryptic statement — who it was directed to and its hidden meaning.\n07:30 – The Power of Vision: Jaisi Drishti, Vaisi Srishti\nHow our inner perception shapes the outer world — a deep spiritual insight.\n09:15 – Controlling the Senses and the Mind\nPractical wisdom from Baba on how to master our desires and thoughts.\n11:00 – How Sai Baba Guides Our Perception\nTransforming negative thinking into divine awareness through Baba's grace.\n12:30 – Spiritual Takeaways for Seekers\nHow this chapter becomes a source of strength, clarity, and inner upliftment.\n14:00 – Conclusion\nWalking the path with Sai — with right vision, patience, and surrender. …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "neem ke patte, sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, rebirth, saibabarebirth, sai baba ka punar janam, sai punarJanam",
    "Views": "12,577 views",
    "Likes": "709"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Sai has once again taken incarnation in the form of a book",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OYVhsv2xVJY",
    "Transcript": "He says this book - Yasachi karave khare Smarak – this book is the samadhi mandir. I am not reducing the importance of Samadhi Mandir but in Baba’s eyes this is Samadhi Mandir. Je sansrutitamatapaharak – that which takes away all the ignorance and sufferings of the world In Baba’s Sai Satcharitra in Adhyay 43 Baba states when I leave my body I will reappear in the form of 8 years old child. Adhyay 43 verse 139 Atha varsha baal jani, prakat houn me magutani, Aise maharaj bhaktalaguni, ahot sanguni rahile. He says now I am going but I will reappear in the form of 8 years old child. Today every devotee who reads this statement, he feels that some time or the other Baba will reappear in the form of 8 years old child. But let me make one thing very clear to you that, that 8 years old child is none other than this Sai Satcharitra. I will now prove how it is 8 years old child. The 8 years old child is this Sai Satcharitra. Baba when he was living in Shirdi, renowned devotees like Kaka Saheb Dixit, Nanasaheb Chandorkar, Hemadpant, so many renowned devotees used to stay back for months and it was Baba’s nature, in those times there was no Bhuti wada, there was Sathe wada, in Sathe wada every morning and evening he used to get spiritual books read like Eknathi Bhagwat, Adhyatma Ramayana, Gnyeshwari, these spiritual book Baba used to get these read from someone. It was apart of his daily routine. If any devotee reached Dwarakamai without reading, Baba used to say today you did not read go and read that which you have left incomplete. Then you come for my darshan. Baba had deep importance for such spiritual books is what we can understand. What are spiritual books? They are those that have nothing other than spirituality. We call them spiritual books. We call them regular reading books. Baba felt that when he leaves the body There will be many intellectuals who will give lots of information and there will be many books published in my name in my name. Baba knew this danger from the beginning and Baba felt there will be many different versions. Baba knew of this danger and that is why he created this daily reading spiritual book. Because when Baba was living even in that time many books were written. Then what was the necessity of Baba’s writing this book. Baba Knew this. What are daily reading books? They have nothing but spirituality. This book is the essence of Gynaneshwari, Eknathi Bhagwat, Adhyatma Ramayan, Bible, Koran. Baba knew it very well that it was necessary to put forward his autobiography otherwise in the name of information they will create thousands of Babas. And what Baba has said that he will come in the form of 8 years old child. How it is that book I will come to it now. Adhyay 2 verse 77 Maji katha mich karavi, Bhaktecha mich purvavi, Tayane ahamvrutti jiravavi, nirvavi ti mamapadi. Baba says Maji katha mich karavi – Baba says I will write my own biography, please listen attentively. We feel, it is our belief that this book is written by Hemadpant but here Baba says Maji katha mich karavi, Bhaktecha mich purvavi, Tayane ahamvrutti jijavavi, nirvavi ti mamapadi. Ahamvrutti jevah mure, tewah tayacha tavahi nure, Mich mag mipan sachare,majyachi kare lihin me. I will write my biography with my own hands. After reading these 2 verses, today I ask you a question, who has written Sai Satcharitra? This proves that Baba has written. These two verses are so important. Why Baba has done this work? Baba had an inkling of this danger that in my name there will be innumerable books in the market. And everyone will claim that we also have a book, this also speaks about Baba. Even when Baba was living there were many books then what was the necessity to create this one. Baba knew, that is he wanted to give original spirituality, if he wanted to express his heart to the world then I will have to create a book book and then he told Hemadpant what will you write my book, first immerse your ego at my feet then I will enter you and I will write my biography. In 1910 Hemadpant took permission from Baba for the book and Baba took Samadhi in 1918. he started writing Sai Satcharitra. Total how many years did it take? In 1910 he took permission and in 1922 writing began. How many years did it take? 12 years. 12 years is considered a penance. What had Baba said about his Guru? Adhyay 19 verse 61 Bara varshe payi vasvata, kela Guruni lahanacha motha, Annavastrasi navata tota, prem potat anivar. Baba also had given 12 years to his Guru. Here also to cleanse Hemadpant, to reduce the ego to zero Baba took 12 years. When 12 years were completed, when internally Hemadpant died, Baba came to life within him and Baba with his own hand wrote. This Sai Satcharitra is written by Baba, this book cannot be compared to any other book. From 1910 to 1922 it took 12 years. In 1922 when he started writing and Avatarnika (53rd Chapter of Sai Satcharitra) was written through Babasaheb Deo and the whole book came into the hands of the devotees in 1930. How many years from 1922 to 1930? 8 years. This is that 8 years old child. This is Sansthan’s list which has given the order in which the events occurred. He started writing the Sai Satcharitra in 1922. It was first published in book format in 1930, this is mentioned by the Sansthan. This is not what we say, this is a part mentioned in list of contents. It took 8 whole years for the book to come in the hands of the devotees. So, the 8 years old child is this Sai Satcharitra. Now you tell me if this book is not in our life and if we keep on worshipping Baba of what worth is this worship? This Sai Satcharitra is Baba’s Biography. It is an autobiography and Baba later says that it is his autobiography so if there is any doubt then he says that I am this Book. I am that 8 years old child. Let this be ingrained in your heart or else this world is so dangerous that they will create an 8 years old child in the name of Baba’s avatar. Today there many self-proclaimed Saibaba claiming to be Saibaba. Tomorrow they may bring a child saying it is that 8 years old child. There is danger. It is this Book. What is not there in this book, is there any question whose answer is not there in this book? You should know how to connect with it. You should enter the book with focus. You know what the problem is with this book? And I am telling you the truth. This book does not allow entry very quickly. People start reading it and reading the Mangalcharan people feel oh my god, this is so dangerous that in this book entry will not be found. After reading the mangalacharan they close the book and never open it again because it has some Sanskrit, it is in verse form that is why entry into this book is not easy. But if you do not have to put that much effort then what spirituality is it? It has to be read again and again that is why it is called daily reading book. Daily devotional book is that book which is not understood by reading it once and has to be read again and again. This is daily devotional book. Today I am sitting in front of you and talking about Sai Satcharitra. Maybe my knowledge is also incomplete. I too have to learn many things. I have to reach Baba’s heart. By reading this book once it cannot be understood. It has to be read again and again. Not even a day passes when this book is not in my hands. You have seen the proof. In 1930 this book came into our hands. In 1929, 52 Adhyays were completed and the 53rd Adhyay was published through Deo Saheb and the whole book came in our hands in 1930. From 1922 to 1930 it is 8 years. So, the 8 years old child is this book. What should be our feeling as a Sai devotee towards this book, you tell me? So honestly and with so much faith and with so much concentration every word has to be read. Today if I am able to say something about Sai Satcharitra then it is so because I show it from that perspective. This book is my Baba. That is why I am able to open up the mysteries of these leelas. If I think that it is written by a devotee named Hemadpant then Baba would not stir such deep things in my heart. First of all, remove this understanding from your head that Hemadpant has written, no doubt we will be obliged to Hemadpant because Baba selected him and no one else. That means there is an invaluable part of that person in this book. Baba has cleansed him for 12 years, has reduced his ego to zero. In my eyes Hemadpant and Baba are one. Adhyay 5 Verse 158 Jene dehacha abhiman jalila, tenechi ha deha sarthaki lavila, Konachahi koil chela, sadhavayala parmarth. There is no difference between Hemadpant and Baba. Baba is Hemadpant and Hemadpant is Baba. Because Baba has clearly stated in Adhyay 2 verse 77 Maji katha mich karavi, Bhaktecha mich purvavi, Tayane ahamvrutti jiravavi, nirvavi ti mamapadi. Now I will give more proofs showing how this book is that child. First proof Adhyay 27 verse 56 – Tevah he granth yetil kama, daptaratun davil Shama, Swaye apan jau nijdhama, Granth Pratima hotil. What has Baba said? When I leave this body, this book will remain in front of you as my image. One more verse clarifying this – Adhyay 45 Verse 9 – Purna hota avatar kruti, harapali ti Parthiva kruthi, Tari ha granth hi vadmaymurthy, deil smruti padopadi. What he says Purna hota avatar kruti - when I complete my Avatar and go then harapali ti Parthiva kruthi - this earthy body of mine will go away permanently. Tari ha granth hi vadmaymurthy – This book is my literary image. Deil smruti padopadi – This will stand in front of you as my avatar all 24 hours and you will keep on remembering me Now third proof how this book is the child – Adhyay 53 verse 146 now you will think that Hemadpant’s ego was reduced to zero so Baba has written through hands of Hemadpant then what about Deo Saheb because Deo Saheb has written 53rd Adhyay. See what Deo Saheb says – Shela na shishu gondas neet – don’t call it a shawl, Shishu Gondas neet - it is a very loving child. Badhavi nav ait dit – it should not get affected by anyone’s evil eye. Avatarnika hi kali tith, baal dheet tya lavavi - this avtarnika (53rd chapter of Sai Satcharitra) that I am writing is like that black beauty spot which is applied to remove the effects of evil eye. Baal dhit tya lavi. how many proofs do I give. Baba has called this book his avatar completion. Adhyay 3 verse 3 – Keleliya malileche lekhan, hoil avidyadoshnirshan, Bhakti bhave karita Shravan, prapanchbhan mavalel. The one who writes my leelas his ignorance will be removed and the one who listens to these stories, the lowly desires of this world, their awareness of this world will go away. In verse 4 he further says – Uthatil shravansagaravari, bhakti premamvruthachya lahari, Budhiya deta uparaupari, yetil kari bodhratne. Even if you dive into this very lightly even then you will get gems of realizations. What realization gems I want to give you through these leela you will get those in your hands. Verse 10 – Yatachi tumche kalyan ahe, mazehi avatarsarthyakya he He says the avatar that he has taken to come to this world, my avatar will be not be meaningful unless I write this book. I have written this book and kept it in their hands is the completion of my avatar. If this book of mine was not there, I would have been incomplete is what Baba says Yatachi tumche kalyan ahe, mazehi avatarsarthyakya he, Mazi to ghokani nitya pahe, kalji vahe hech me. I am always worried for you that is why I have created this book and kept it in your hands. I have created this book that is the completion of my avatar. Had I not given this book in your hand then my coming and going would go to waste is what he says. I am trying to make you realize how important this book is in life of a Sai devotee. And today the whole world is pointing fingers at Baba, we do not have the Sai Satcharitra’s light, which is Baba himself. Till such time we see it with this perspective then how will we understand the secrets of Baba’s leelas? How will we get the gems of Baba’s teachings in our hands? How will we show Baba’s true image to the world? Do you know what is Baba’s image in front of the world today? We are Baba’s devotee so we do not want to see that part of the world. But what is Baba’s image in the world, that he performs some miracles, fulfils some wishes and that is why the world is crazy about him and does Sai Sai. This is Baba’s image and we have created this image. Because we have neither preached nor propagated Baba’s true Knowledge. This is our biggest weakness and I am repeatedly saying that if Baba is the Book, then matter is over. There is a very important verse in Adhyay 53 verse 172 – Yasachi karave khare Smarak, Je sansrutitamatapaharak, Mohmayaniraytarak, shantidayak Akshay. He says this book - Yasachi karave khare Smarak – this book is the samadhi mandir. I am not reducing the importance of Samadhi Mandir but in Baba’s eyes this is Samadhi Mandir. that which takes away all the ignorance and sufferings of the world is this book. Mohmayaniraytarak – it puts an end to the hell of attachments and illusions. shantidayak Akshay The importance of this book is extraordinary. Let me tell you one thing, please listen attentively. We all come running from Mumbai, Goa, Nashik and from all the corners of the world and go to the Samadhi Mandir after taking bath, etc for darshan. To tell you the truth it is not darshan at all. If you want to truly take Samadhi Mandir darshan then first come and take bath etc, book a room and then go to the Parayan hall and take a dive into one Adhyay of Baba and after taking a dip the emotional state that you will be in, that purity and with that you go to Samadhi mandir and stand in front of Baba, there will be no tears in your eyes but tears will flow from Baba’s eyes. Because without the book if you stand in the Samadhi Mandir, you become the Master and Baba servant because you take your desires there but if you first read the Book before entering the Samadhi Mandir you will be servant and make Baba the Master and that is the big difference. It is the difference between land and sky. It is my request to all that whenever you go for Darshan to the Samadhi Mandir first go to the Parayan Hall, dive into an Adhyay completely. What actually is Sai Satcharitra? Many people would be sad about this, that in the olden times people very so fortunate to be sitting Baba’s darbar in front of him. Many people must be feeling this, But to tell you the truth if you sit with this book, you are sitting in front of Baba, in his company in Dwarakamai. You are actually sitting there because Baba has done this in the Book. That is the purpose of creating this Book. For example, say in my past life I were Shama, had my experiences with Baba, I would have understood Baba only to the extent that I was in his company. Please listen attentively to what I speak. If I am Shama then I will understand Baba only to the extent that I spent time in Baba’s company. If I were Kakasaheb Dixit then I would have understood Baba only to the extent I (kakasaheb Dixit) spent time with Baba. But today we are so fortunate that all their experiences are present before us in one Book. So, in a way you become Shama, you become Dixit, you become Nanasaheb Chandorkar and if your journey is in right direction then one day you become Saibaba. This is the power of the book. And there is one more thing, Baba is said to be Murth Parabrahma in this book. Adhyay 21 verse 126 – Agad Sainathancha mahima, agad tayanchya katha parma, Agad Saicharitrachi seema, Murth Parabrahmaavatar. Now this book is called Murth Parabrahmaavatar. If there is any incarnation of the living Supreme Brahma then it is this Book is what Baba says. I will repeatedly say Baba because if I say Hemadpant the value of the book will reduce. That is why I say again and again that this is written by Baba. Agad Sainathancha mahima, agad tayanchya katha parma, Agad Saicharitrachi seema, Murth Parabrahmaavatar. There are so many books that have come, many books are been written in many languages but this Book is Baba Himself. If this does not come in our daily reading then very sadly, I will say that we are not Baba devotee at all. Because if we do not know Baba’s will then how are we Baba’s devotees? This charitra is his will. If we have to do bhakti as per our wish then there is no need of Sai Satcharitra. Then you are free to do bhakti as per your wish. Neither me nor Baba are going to hold you by your collar. That will be your personal decision. You can read any book as per as your wish, can worship as per your wish but if you wish to live your life as per Baba’s will, if you wish to worship as per Baba’s will then you have no choice other than Sai Satcharitra. . When my video on this topic was released on YouTube many people protested whether Baba is only in Sai Satcharitra. Is there no Baba in other devotee’s writings? This question has been raised many times. I am not against them. If you feel that you are been benefited by those books then you should read it, I am not against it but no book can compete with Sai Satcharitra. Why because this book is Vedant Vishay ati gahan – the subject of Vedant is very deep. If there is no base of Vedant in a spiritual book then that book has no value. Vedant Vishay ati gahan virakti bhakti na jod deun, aise granth karne nirman Guru krupe hun durgat. This is that book which talks about Vedant through the medium of leelas. So please do not compare this with other books. You can read other books for information, I am not against it but for daily recitation what is written there – it is okay to skip a meal, it is okay to miss a bath in a day, it is okay to sleep less for an hour but you must not miss reading one Adhyay in a day of Sai Satcharitra. All those sitting here promise me that you will not miss reading Sai Satcharitra even for a day. All those who promise this please raise your hand. If you are promising me, it means that you are promising Baba so, please take this seriously. You will understand the benefit of reading it daily in nine months. Just read only for nine months one Adhyay a day. Your life will change. You will be born again that is my guarantee. This is compared with other books. Whether there is Baba in other books or not. If other books are infinite stars in the night, then Sai Satcharitra is like the Shining Sun. Have you seen a magnifying glass. What is a magnifying glass? If we keep it in the light of Sun and if it collects all the rays together then a power is created in that and it burns the paper. Then collecting all the spiritual books of the world, it is inserted in the magnifying glass, all you need to do is concentrate and it will burn the body intelligence. This book is that magnifying glass. So, I hope you have understood what Sai Satcharitra. Kabirji says Kabira ek na janya, Bahu janya kya hoi. Ek te sab hot hai, Sabte ek na hoi. If in your lifetime you do not understand one Sai Satcharitra, even if you read all the books in the world, what will you achieve? Because all are there because of One, the One is not because of all. I remember one incidence from Vivekananda’s life. It is said that when he went to Chicago for World’s Parliament of Religion in USA, that time India did not have much reach, all the religious leaders were called first and Vivekanandji was called last. And our religious scripture Bhagwad Gita was kept at the bottom of all the other scriptures. . The time was getting over and he was shown the clock stating that you have only 10 minutes, so whatever you can speak on your Hindu religion speak and conclude in 10 minutes. So, when Vivekanand begins with My Brothers and Sisters, at these words the entire congregation in the hall gave a resounding applause. And what did you do, you kept our religion and scripture Bhagwad Geeta at the bottom and kept all the other scriptures on top of it. But you don’t know that if I pull out the Bhagwad Geeta scripture which is at the bottom all the scriptures on top will topple down. Sai Satcharitra is like that. This is the base. All other books written on Baba, you can keep as many as you want on top of it, this book is willing to carry all the burdens but don’t mess with this. If this is pulled out then all the other books will fall down. Kabirji also says – Sab aye is ek mei, Daal paat phal phool. Daal means the branches paat means the leaves. Sab aye is ek mei, Daal paat phal phool. Kabir piche kya raha, Gah pakadi jab mool. It means that if you get to the roots, if you are watering the roots then the tree is going to be green, the branches will be green. the branches will be green. There will be lots of fruits lots of flowers will bloom but it is necessary to water the roots. Similarly, Sai Satcharitra for Baba’s devotees are like the roots, it is the base, don’t try to shake this. Many people troubled me when this video was released so with a very burdened mind, I made a video to reply back whereas Baba says that no reply should be given to such people, such people will do such nonsense things. But with a heavy heart we made a video where Sai Satcharitra was narrating its life story, I present it to you and will end this talk with that. This Sai Satcharitra is telling us I am the decoration of your life, , I Sai Satcharitra is the essence of your existence, where you are so engrossed in accumulating the branches and the leaves of the tree, I am the roots and the support of that tree. Why is your head so burdened with stones and pebbles of information, I am the shining Kohinoor on your forehead. Why are you so drenched with the shimmer of infinite stars which seems like the light of fireflies, not only you but the entire universe is illuminated I am that Sun. Why are you crawling like a small insect on the ground? I am the wings with which you can fly to the skies of the Absolute. Yes, I am Sai Satcharitra the essence of your life, the basis of your life.",
    "Description": "Sai has once again incarnated in the form of a book \n\n#saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory #saibabadevotee #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahaya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba #dashera #saibabapunyatithi #saibabavijaydashmi #saibabasamadhi #saigyan #saibabaprayer #saibabapreachings #saibabadialogue #saibabadivineteachings #dussehra #saibaba #saileela #saibabasamadhi\n#shraddha #saboori #sachchi sraddha #rebirth #saibabareels #satyasai …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "neem ke patte, sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, rebirth, saibabarebirth, sai baba ka punar janam, sai punarJanam",
    "Views": "18,474 views",
    "Likes": "785"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई के आगे चिट्ठी डालना सही या गलत ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kFfsd3i5b5M",
    "Transcript": "When to cast the chits? You can't cast chits on every small and big issue. Understand that we have two options, one is right and the other is wrong, so there is no need to cast chits there. Our conscience says this is right and this is wrong. So, we have to leave the wrong and hold on to the right. So there is no need to cast a chit on it. The master has given you that much understanding, hasn't he? But we have two options, and both are right, both are good, both led to Shreyas Marg, no involvement of preya in it there is a situation of confusion, both are good deeds, but cannot take decisions, wondering what to do and what not to do, at that time if you keep casting chits throughout your life then there is nothing wrong. But one is right and the other is wrong and then a decision is taken by drawing lots (chits) and according to that, every small and big thing is done with Baba's permission, then there will be no greater foolishness than this, if it will give some wrong result, then blame game will be on Baba and then We say i did it only after taking permission, it will become more dangerous. The Lord has given us understanding, conscience and wisdom, then we should take a decision only after considering it thoroughly. Let me give you an example: Suppose I am going through a lot of financial crises at home, I am going through a lot of economic recession. There is a shortage of food in the house. God forbid I am stuck in such a situation and in front of my eyes the guy living in my neighborhood while walking he starts taking out a handkerchief from his pocket and a bundle of currency notes falls out from his pocket. Now my mind will say, Baba talks about the mind, a mind can think what an enemy can't Now the mind will say, did you see how kind Baba is? Seeing so much trouble today, Baba forced that bundle of notes to fall in front of my eyes. One mind says whether taking Bundel of currency notes is right or wrong. Let's cast a chit. Is it right or wrong to cast a chit here? Obviously its wrong. The money on which I have no right This is a game of the mind, as always conditioned, so there is no need to use chits, I should just pick up the bundle of notes and give it to that person. Then whatever Baba want to do can do it, it is His wish, this is what a true person will do. He will not cast chits. so it is so subtle. Where there are two options, both of which are correct, if you are unable to decide, then cast chits. And in such a situation, even throughout your life, if you seek Baba's shelter and seek permission by writing/casting a chit, then it is not wrong, but in reality, the more you become more focused in your sadhana, the more you become available to renunciation, the less is the need to cast a chit. keeps happening naturally. Because your consciousness answers you from within that it is right, so keep doing it. This does not mean that casting chits is a big task. In the initial stage, when you are not able to understand the thing and there are two correct options, then you are forced to cast chits/letter, then you are not wrong, but if one is right and one is wrong, then it is a mistake. Om Sai Ram The important lesson of this leela is for all such devotees who want to impose their will in the name of Baba with the help of chits and who are trapped in the best of three best of five, Baba has a word in Chapter 25. in which he says i m not into it you cannot deceive me In the initial stages of meditation As long as your ego stands against me And both are stuck in the right choices. vTill then, we can take the help of chits and behave as per his orders, but yes, you cannot stop there. By increasing the intensity of sadhana, you have to erase your ego, your indulgence instinct, your doer ship and the resolution options of your mind so that this feeling of duality that you are separate from me is erased, only then can this chits turn into dust.",
    "Description": "एक राह है श्रेय की बंधु \nएक राह है प्रेय \nचुनना नहीं है मुश्किल प्यारे \nप्रेय गिरा श्रेय लेय\nमिले मार्ग गर दोनों श्रेय के \nपूछ ले साईं की मर्ज़ी \nलेकिन ये कहना ना भूलना \nबस चाहु तेरी मर्ज़ी \nजय साईं समर्थ 🙏\n\nकब चिट्‌ठियाँ फेंकें और कब न करें | भगवान के प्रति सच्ची समझ और श्रद्धा\nइस सत्संग में हम सीखते हैं कि चिट्‌ठियाँ फेंकने का उद्देश्य और सही समय क्या है। जीवन में हर छोटी-बड़ी बात पर चिट्‌ठियाँ फेंकना उचित नहीं होता, क्योंकि हमारे अंदर भगवान ने हमें विवेक, समझदारी और अंतरात्मा का उपहार दिया है। जब हमारे सामने दो विकल्प हों — एक सही और दूसरा गलत — तब हमारे लिए निर्णय लेना आसान होता है, क्योंकि हमारा अंतरात्मा हमें सही और गलत की पहचान करवा देता है। ऐसे समय में चिट्‌ठी फेंकने की आवश्यकता नहीं होती।\n\nलेकिन जब जीवन में ऐसा संकट या उलझन आती है जहाँ दोनों विकल्प अच्छे हैं, दोनों श्रीयस मार्ग (सही मार्ग) की ओर ले जाते हैं, और हम निर्णय लेने में असमर्थ हों, तब हम चिट्‌ठी फेंक सकते हैं। चिट्‌ठी फेंकना एक आध्यात्मिक साधन बन जाता है उस समय, जो हमें भगवान के आश्रय में लाकर हमारे मन को शांति प्रदान करता है।\n\nइस सत्संग में एक महत्वपूर्ण उदाहरण भी दिया गया है — यदि आर्थिक संकट में किसी के सामने पड़ोसी की जेब से नोटों का बंडल गिर जाए, तो क्या उसे उठाकर रखना चाहिए या चिट्‌ठी फेंककर निर्णय लेना चाहिए? इस स्थिति में बुद्धिमत्ता यही है कि जो वस्तु किसी की है, उसे उसी को वापस देना चाहिए। इस प्रकार हमारा मन विचलित होता है, लेकिन यदि हम भगवान की दी हुई समझ और विवेक पर भरोसा करें, तो हमें भटकने की ज़रूरत नहीं।\n\nइसका गहरा संदेश है:\n\nहम जब तक अपनी साधना में प्रगति नहीं करते, तब तक चिट्‌ठियाँ एक सहायक साधन हो सकती हैं।\nजैसे-जैसे हमारा मन और आत्मा भगवान के प्रति अधिक समर्पित और एकीकृत होता जाता है, हमारी आंतरिक चेतना हमें स्वतः सही निर्णय लेने में सक्षम बनाती है, और चिट्‌ठियाँ फेंकने की आवश्यकता समाप्त हो जाती है।\nयह समझना जरूरी है कि चिट्‌ठियाँ फेंकना कभी भी बहाना या भगवान के नाम पर अपनी इच्छाएँ मनवाने का जरिया नहीं बनना चाहिए, क्योंकि भगवान कहते हैं \"मैं इसमें नहीं हूँ, मुझे धोखा नहीं दे सकते।\"\nअसली आध्यात्मिक प्रगति तब होती है जब हम अपने अहंकार, इच्छाएँ और मन की द्वैत भावना को मिटा देते हैं और परमात्मा के साथ पूर्ण एकात्मता प्राप्त करते हैं।\nइस सत्संग के माध्यम से हमें यह भी सिखाया गया है कि जीवन में निर्णय लेने का आधार भगवान की दी हुई अंतरात्मा और विवेक हो, न कि संदेह, उलझन या अधीरता। जब मन स्पष्ट हो जाता है और आत्मा शांत हो जाती है, तब हर निर्णय स्वाभाविक रूप से सही होता है।\n\nआइए हम इस शिक्षा को अपने जीवन में उतारें, अपने अहंकार को कम करें, और भगवान के प्रति पूर्ण श्रद्धा व विश्वास से निर्णय लें। तब हम पाएंगे कि हमारा जीवन सरल, सशक्त और शांति से भरपूर हो जाएगा। \n\nThere is one path of virtue, my friend,\nAnd one path of desire.\nChoosing is not difficult, dear—\nDesire leads to downfall, virtue leads to gain.\nIf both paths are virtuous,\nAsk Sai for His will.\nBut never forget to say—\nI only wish for Your will.\nJai Sai Samarth 🙏\nWhen to cast lots (throw chitthis) and when not to | True understanding and devotion towards God\nIn this satsang, we learn about the purpose and the right time to cast lots (chitthis). It is not appropriate to cast lots for every little thing in life because God has gifted us with discernment, wisdom, and conscience. When we face two options—one right and one wrong—it is easy for us to decide, because our conscience guides us to recognize right and wrong. In such situations, casting lots is unnecessary.\n\nHowever, when life presents a dilemma or confusion where both options are good and lead to the path of virtue (shreyas), and we are unable to make a decision, then we may cast lots. At such times, casting lots becomes a spiritual tool that brings us under God’s refuge and grants peace to our minds.\n\nAn important example given in this satsang is: if someone finds a bundle of notes dropped from a neighbor’s pocket during a financial crisis, should they keep it or cast lots to decide? The wise thing is to return what belongs to others. This may disturb our mind, but if we trust the understanding and wisdom given by God, we need not wander astray.\n\nThe profound message is:\n\nUntil we progress in our spiritual practice, casting lots can be a helpful aid.\nAs our mind and soul become more devoted and united with God, our inner consciousness naturally empowers us to make correct decisions, and the need to cast lots ceases.\nIt is important to understand that casting lots should never become an excuse or a way to get our own desires fulfilled in God’s name, because God says, “I am not involved in this; I cannot be deceived.”\nTrue spiritual progress happens when we dissolve our ego, desires, and duality of the mind and attain complete oneness with the Supreme.\nThrough this satsang, we are also taught that the basis for decision-making in life should be the conscience and wisdom given by God—not doubt, confusion, or impatience. When the mind becomes clear and the soul calm, every decision naturally becomes right.\nLet us apply this teaching in our lives, reduce our ego, and take decisions with full faith and devotion towards God. Then we will find our lives become simple, powerful, and full of peace. …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, सच्ची श्रद्धा, श्रद्धा, chitthi, sai baba ke samne chitthi, chitthi ki kahani",
    "Views": "5,841 views",
    "Likes": "431"
  },
  {
    "Title": "आरती साईबाबा ... संपूर्ण भावार्थ",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-hd4ZO38r64",
    "Transcript": "It is His greatness, he will keep on asking from me something for fulfilling his wishes in the beginning and I will have to give it, but whilst giving Baba is also cautious that going ahead, I have to turn him towards spirituality. Before coming to Aarti, I would like to clarify one thing, so that I can open up the depth of that Aarti easily. Every person in his lifetime goes through three stages. And some person may complete all the three stages in one lifetime or some may take many lifetimes. First stage is that I want this material world only, I want the comforts and luxuries of this material world. This is the first stage. So even the devotion to God is done for the material things only. They do devotion but the devotion is for fulfilling desires. They want material world. That is the first stage. But doing this devotion for fulfilling desires, little bit of faith increases, gets clarity, the depth of life begins to open. Then the person reaches second stage. Here he says he wants God also. Means along with the material world he also wants God. He reaches the second stage. From Wanting only material world, wants God also. If the devotion continues and he goes deeper in devotion, after many stumbles, after opening up of more depths of life he reaches the third and the last stage, wants God only. That state is known as Mumuksha. Wants God only. Wants only exclusive devotion towards Sadguru. Wants nothing other than this. The Aarti that you mentioned Aarti Saibaba covers all these three stage That is why I thought I should make this clear first so that when I open it up it will become clearer. There are 7 verses and all the verses highlights all the three stages. It begins with wanting only the material world and ends with wanting God only. Now we will see how the verses opens up these three stages. Aarti Sai Baba, saukhyadaataara jeeva. Charana rajaatalee Dhyaava daasaan visaawaa, bhaktaa visaawaa. Aarti Sai Baba. We take Pancharati (A dish which holds five lamps) and we wave it around Baba, he wants to say that my mind, senses, intellect, memory, body all they may keep revolving around you, may my entire awareness revolve around you, every moment be spent in your contemplation. That is what Aarti Saibaba means. he wants to say that my mind, senses, intellect, memory, body all they may keep revolving around you, may my entire awareness revolve around you, every moment be spent in your contemplation. That is what Aarti Saibaba means. saukhyadaataara jeeva – you give happiness to the entire Brahmand, to every living being. You have incarnated to removes troubles and give happiness. Charana rajaatalee Dhyaava daasaan visaawaa - Make me servant of every particle of the dust from your feet. Madhavrao Adkarji wanted to say that direct devotion, understanding your heart, catching your emotions, your stature is so high that my awareness can never reach there. That is why like the dust particle of your feet, one who is attached to you, one whose exclusive devotion for you is proven, make me servant of such a person. Look at the vastness of his heart, what he wants to say and how true it is. Not every person can understand the heart of Sadguru. Reaching to his heart is not within the reach of every person. So, in this world the dust or dust particles rising from your feet, a devotes who is of such a stature to reach there, then Master, make me servant of his feet. That is why in Adhyay 11 of Sai Satcharitra in that it is said about Shamaji Adi na geta nandi che darshan, Shankar hoel kay prasana Shama had that exclusive devotion to Baba So before people could reach Baba, he used to say reach out to Shama and come here through him. This is mentioned many times in Sai Satcharitra. Why he used to do that. Did he not have the capacity to give experience directly? He had that. Even then in the right way, Baba wanted to instil humbleness in them. First you become servant of my servant and then as your maturity level increases, the more it deepens then there is no need of anyone else. Then there will be only you and me. The day you understand my heart, you understand me intimately, when your capacity to understand me increases you will not require any other person. But till such time your awareness does not reach that state then be at the feet of such a person whose undivided devotion towards me has been proven. So he says Charana rajaatalee Dhyaava daasaan visaawaa bhaktaa visaawaa - so a servant, devotee like me let me be of service to the dust particle of your feet, let me be of service to your exclusive devotee, to serve at their feet. In the first verse itself he has said such a deep thing. That is why he has not said serve at your feet, he has said dust particle of your feet. That means while coming to me your entire ego has to go. Now we come to the second verse. Jaaluniyaan aananng swaswaroopee raahe dhanga Mumukshu janaan daavee nija dolaan Sreeranga, dolaan Sreeranga Aarti Sai Baba. Jaaluniyaan aananng – aananng means some people call it Kamdev, some call it attachment to the world. You have burnt all the attachments of the world and you have applied the ashes on your forehead. You are of that stature. swaswaroopee raahe dhanga – you in the form of Satchidananda are always blissful. You are never troubled by worldly, sorrows, sufferings and fears, you are of that stature. You have burnt the worldly attachments and made it to ashes, you in your true form, in the form of Sachidananda are enjoying every moment of it. Mumukshu janaan daavee – And the true aspirants (Mumushu), earlier it was mentioned as Charanrajsuch people who are your devotee, who are mumukshus and live only for your exclusive devotion, you open your third eye for them and that he himself is Lord Vishnu (Shrirang), you give them this experience, that is your stature. And I wave the lamp at the feet of such Sadguru. Now we move to the third verse Jayaa manee jaisaa bhaava tayaa taisaa anubhava Daawisee dayaaghanaa aisee tujzee hee maava tujzeeheemaava Aarti Sai Baba. What the feeling are of a person, you give him experience as per that. This line applies to Baba only. In this world all the earlier Saints, Sadguru who had come and are still coming, they always say that we will not fulfil all your wants, there has to be truth in your wants and if it for your good only then we will fulfil your desires. We will not fulfil your every legitimate and illegitimate demand. But Baba says the exact opposite of it. jaisaa bhaava tayaa taisaa anubhava – By saying this how many troubles Baba must be taking on his head. It is not easy to fulfil your every legitimate and illegitimate wants. If at the beginning you made an illegitimate demand, whatever you ask, when you go to Baba and ask something it is not necessary that it is a legitimate demand. We are not Mumukshus. We are materialistic people. So, it is natural that we will ask for attachments only. Baba says that I will give you that. That too I will give. How much compassion! By giving he is increasing his troubles. If he fulfils my desires as per my wish, it is like trapping me more in ignorance. It is natural, isn’t it? And after trapping he only has to bring the person out of it. In a way he has increased his troubles. If a person is trapped in a whirlpool, then the only way to get a person out of it is by you, yourself jumping into that whirlpool. And the way he moves around, you too have to move around. Moving thus you have to go to the bottom and there the power of the whirlpool ends, then from the side he has to be removed and brought up. He is taking on himself so much danger by saying jaisaa bhaava tayaa taisaa anubhava. You must understand his mercy, compassion behind this. It is His greatness, he will keep on asking from me something for fulfilling his wishes in the beginning and I will have to give it, but whilst giving Baba is also cautious that going ahead, I have to turn him towards spirituality. I am trapping him but I only have to pull him out of it. How big a danger it is and how much of a hassle it is even then out of compassion he has given this promise and he is fulfilling it even today. That is why there will never be a miraculous Sadguru ever in this world again. Behind all this his compassion is clearly seen. He first gets down to our level and fulfils our wishes and after that wipe off our attitude of wanting things. This is a very challenging job. It is not easy. Even then he is meeting the challenge even today. For every new devotee, as per his wish he steps down to their level, fulfils it and he is also aware that he has to move them forward towards spirituality. The fourth verse – Tumache naama dhyaataan hare sansrithi vyathaa Agaadha tava karanee maarga daawisee anaadhaa,daawisee anaadhaa Aarti Sai Baba. Now in the third verse he stepped down to our level and worked, means what I had said, that only material things were wanted that was the third verse. Now the shift begins when we come to the fourth verse Tumache naama dhyaataan hare sansrithi vyathaa, Agaadha tava karanee maarga daawisee anaadhaa – now here the shifting begins. What he says Tumache naama dhyaataan – if Baba performs some miracle as per my feelings, if he fulfils my wishes then it is but natural that my devotion towards him gradually increases and due to this, I start chanting his name. And that chanting puts an end to all my troubles. He first develops an interest in his name, by fulfilling my wishes and then he ignities thirst for chanting his name., he fills it with sweetness. Agaadha tava karanee – This doing of yours is very vast, no person can understand this, cannot define. maarga daawisee anaadhaa – what path is he showing? The path of Knowledge of the Self, path of spirituality. The person does not even understand when he was shifted from one track to the other. He has now reached the second stage where he says that he wants God also. He wants to do devotion to God along with the material world. Earlier he said that he wanted only the material world now he wants God also. This was the fourth verse. Fifth verse – Kaliyugee avataara saguna parabrahm saachara Avateerna jhaalase swami Datta Digambara, Datta Digambara Aarti Sai Baba. Here Adkarji has addressed Baba as Datta Digambara. Kaliyugee avataara – For this Kali, a normal Avatar is of no use, there has to be a person of the level of Datta Digambara to save today’s man. Because person’s intellect has corrupted so much, he is so desirous of things and to save such a person, a person who has the power to get into the whirlpool and pull him out only such a person can save today’s person. That is why he says to Baba, Oh Baba you are an avatar of Datta Digambara, means he is a Purna avatar. In Datta Digambara you are Shivji who removes our ignorance, our tamas by becoming Shivji. You by becoming Brahmadev light the flame of our soul and the day when the Tamas is removed and when the light of the Soul is lit within us, then by you by becoming Vishnu you fill our life with 8 Siddhis and 9 treasures of Kubera (Navnidhis). Then like you, we too will serve the world with unique feelings that is why you are Sadguru, avatar of Datta Digambara, you are Purna Avatar. After reaching here the devotion deepens further, the devotes who is devoted to Baba, his devotion deepens further and he says – Aattan divasaan guruwaaree bhakta karitee waaree Prabhupada pahaavayaa bhavabhaya niwaree, bhaya niwaree Aarti Sai Baba. After every eight days, the Thursday that comes, here he is saying that the devotion is gradually increasing, his mind is filled with Baba and he starts doing trips to Shirdi to take Baba’s darshan. The way towards matchless devotion is made. Then he says Prabhupada pahaavayaa – to get darshan of your feet, here it means that till date I said that I want only this materialistic world which means now he wants Him also. Prabhupada pahaavayaa means after today my wish will not be done if I have become a servant at your feet. Here he has not said Charanrajatali he has said Prabhupada pahaavayaa that means there is a now a direct relationship, now there is no need of middleman. So, if we look at this Aarti deeply then it is a big journey in a way, a spiritual journey. Prabhupada pahaavayaa bhavabhaya niwaree – my biggest fear in this world is death and Baba’s devotees whose devotion has converted to exclusive devotion, who have come out of desire filled devotion (Sakam Bhakti) to devotion without expectation (Nishkam Bhakti), the one who has become an expert in Nishkam bhakti, of such devotee you take away their fear of death. You give them experiential understanding that they are souls which has no death. With this experiential understanding he uproots the fear of death forever is what he says. This was the fifth verse and in the sixth verse devotion deepens further Maajan nija dravya tteewaa tav charan rajasevaa Maagane hechiyaataa tumhan devaadhideva, Devaadhideva Aarti Sai Baba. All the treasure of my life is tav charan rajasevaa again he says charanraj, if there are any earnings from this life then it is service to the dust particle of your feet (Charanraj Seva). This entire Brahmand is dust particle of your feet. It is my wish that I become a servant of your grand form is what he says. Not only yours but your entire grand form I will be your servant Is all that I ask for. God of Gods, Guru of the Gurus, it is my only request, it is my only wish that you make me servant of the dust particle of your feet feet so that I can see only your form in every particle, I can have darshan of the grand form, I can bow down in front of the grand form is what I ask for and that will be the earning of my life and you fill me with such good feelings. See where he has reached now. He begins the aarti from desires (Sakam) and it is now going deeper and in the last verse he says – Ichchita deena chaatak nirmala toya nijasookha Paajaawe maadhavaa yaa saambhal aapulee bhaaka, aapulee bhaaka Aarti Saibaba. Just as Chatak bird before the monsoon season keeps on looking at the skies, when it will rain and when will I get that one drop of water and satisfy my life’s tiredness and thirst in the same way is the devotee. He says that all I want is darshan of your Satchidanand form. Just fill my life with that one drop. Paajaawe maadhavaa – means that Satchidanand form, that nectar, I sit in front of you with thirst for that and you have promised that you have incarnated to give that nectar to drink, please fulfil your promise and give me the darshan of that Satchidanand form and give me the taste of that nectar and fulfil my life is how he ends the Aarti.",
    "Description": "Om Sai Ram 🙏🏻\nWe all chant “Aarti Sai Baba”, but few pause to ask:\n👉 What is Sai Baba really telling us through these verses?\n👉 Why were these words chosen to invoke Him?\nIn this rare satsang, Krishnaji decodes each stanza, uncovering the hidden spiritual truths behind this sacred Aarti.\nNot just a song—but a roadmap to devotion, surrender, and inner awakening.\nIf you’ve recited it with faith—now receive it with understanding.\n🔔 Don’t just chant the Aarti. Let it change you.\n\nॐ साई राम 🙏🏻\nहम सब ‘आरती साईं बाबा’ का पाठ करते हैं,\nलेकिन क्या आपने कभी सोचा —\n👉 बाबा इन पंक्तियों के माध्यम से हमें क्या सिखा रहे हैं?\n👉 उन्हें पुकारने के लिए यही शब्द क्यों चुने गए?\nइस दुर्लभ सत्संग में कृष्णाजी हर चरण को खोलते हैं, और बताते हैं कि यह आरती सिर्फ भक्ति नहीं, बल्कि आंतरिक जागरण और आत्म-समर्पण की एक जीवंत शिक्षा है।\nअगर आपने इसे अब तक श्रद्धा से गाया है- अब समय है इसे समझकर आत्मसात करने का।\n\n#saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahaya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba #dashera #saibabapunyatithi #saibabavijaydashmi #saibabasamadhi #saigyan #saibabaprayer #saibabapreachings #saibabadialogue #saibabadivineteachings #दशहरा #साईबाबा #साईलीला #साईबाबासमाधी\n#shraddha #saboori #सच्ची श्रद्धा …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "neem ke patte, sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, सच्ची श्रद्धा, श्रद्धा, neem ka ped, meemkaped, neem ka mahatava, Aarti saibaba, sai baba ki aarti, sai aarti, aarti, arti, sai arti",
    "Views": "9,797 views",
    "Likes": "603"
  },
  {
    "Title": "शिरडी के नीम के पत्ते क्या सच में मीठे है ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ooABC8F1Mls",
    "Transcript": "firstly what is neem tree? and why baba appeared under the neem tree? In Shirdi it is said that the leaves of Neem tree in Gurusthan are sweet. This has been written in many books, many people discuss this, but many people have put up this question to me saying Annaji whenever we have picked up the leaves and ate it, we found it to be bitter. This question is asked by many if really the Neem leaves in Shirdi taste sweet. I will come to this topic. First, we will describe the Neem tree. We will see what the Sai Satcharitra has to say about the Neem tree. Baba was first seen in Shirdi at the age of 16 under the Neem tree. He appeared first time under the Neem tree in Shirdi. It is that Neem tree where there is Baba’s Guru’s Samadhi. Adhyay 4 Verse 111 Taisechi he shrisainath. Tarun sola varshache vayat. Nimbatali Shirdi gavat. Pratham Bhaktarth Prakatale. In a very young age at the age of 16, in Shirdi village under the Neem tree he was first seen. Adhyay 4 Verse 118 Pahuni sundar balrup. Loka mani vismay amup – people were surprised Kovalya vayat khadtar tap. In such young age the child was seen doing such difficult penance. Sheet atap samsamya Be it extreme cold or extreme hot weather in both he was like statute of penance at such a young age 16 years. What does these verses tell us. Firstly, what is Neem tree? And why did Baba appear under Neem tree only. This is a big question. There is one Stotra in Sai Mahimna strotram about this Neem tree Sada Nimbarvrikshasya mooladhiwasat, Sudhasravinam tiktamapi-apriyam tam, Tarum Kalpavrikshadhikam sadhayantam, Namameeshwaram Sadgurum Sai Natham This Shloka has been written by Upasani Maharaj in Sai Mahimna strotram. Because Baba always sat under the Neem tree, the Neem tree became wish fulfilling tree. The nature of Neem tree is always bitter but being close to Baba it became sweet. It became a wish fulfilling tree. This is the usual meaning of the shloka. By being in his company a bitter tree like Neem also became sweet like the wish fulfilling tree. To such Sainath I bow down to his feet is what Upasani Maharaj says. How many of you here have read Gajanan Maharaj Charitra? I narrate a story from Gajanan Vijay. There was a gentleman by name of Govindbua Taklikar he was devotional singer (Kirtankar). Whenever he used to go for devotional singing (Kirtan), in those time there were not many facilities he used to ride a horse and go to different villages and do devotional singing (Kirtan). But his horse was very playful. In Marathi it is called naughty. He would kick someone or hit by his head so people used to fear going near him. Many people used to ask him why have you kept such a horse. Just kill him by shooting him. He hurts people But Govindbua Taklikar used to think how can I kill him. He used to chain him even then he used to try to break the chain all the time. He was such a horse. Now think that this horse is Neem tree. He used to tire himself thinking what to do of this horse. One day he reaches Shegaon and there he has to perform devotional singing(kirtan) for Gajanan Maharaj. Like every time he forcefully chained the horse and goes for the devotional singing (Kirtan). He does the Kirtan whole evening and then he sleeps in the room But he starts thinking whether the horse has ran away breaking the chains. If he absconds then he will hurt someone. So out of fear he keeps looking at the horse from time to time. When one such time he opens his eyes and sees the horse to see if he was quiet, he sees that the horse was standing very quietly. Govindbua Taklikar is surprised that the horse is so very quiet. He was calm and still. Those who have read this would know about Govindbua Taklikar, it is Adhyay 9 of Gajanan Vijay. He was surprised, it was like a miracle that the horse was so quiet. He goes out to see and he sees that in between the four feet of the horse Gajanan Maharaj was sleeping very comfortably. He understands the reason. The horse today is so quiet because Maharaj is sleeping there. It is said that after that all the playfulness of that horse vanished. The horse became a Sadhu. Neem tree is like that. Even if it is bitter as per its nature but it also has many medicinal qualities. It is not bitterness only. Just as Gajanan Maharaj took his seat in between the horse’s feet, he was sleeping there and the horse calmed down similarly Baba took his seat under the bitter Neem tree, he transformed it into wish fulfilling tree. This is what the story says. Now we shall come to the main question. Are the Neem leaves really sweet in Shirdi? To be very honest, if people eat the Neem leaves, then the taste of the Neem leaves will be bitter for 99.9% people and it is bitter to be very honest. But it has some different depth to it and I want to tell you that today. Why it is said so? Then it will be clear that in a way it is sweet also. But it is sweet from a spiritual perspective. Kabirji Says – Meetha Meetha Sab kahe, Meetha Sabe koi Khay, Kadva Neem na Pivashi, Sabhi rog mit jay. Cannot drink the bitter Neem but if you increase your stamina to drink the bitter Neem then all the diseases of the world vanish. This is Neem tree. There is one more Doha Durjan ki karuna buri, Bhalo Sa ko tras, Suraj jab garmi kare tab barsan ki aas. If there is some cruel person then his compassion is also bad. If a person is in wrong business or earns money the wrong way, then from such a person do not even borrow money. Durjan ki karuna buri – How much so ever such a person helps you or tries to help you, then don’t take help from such a person. On the contrary if there is some good person, if such a person even if he scolds, hits you even then his trouble is good. The more the Sun heats up the more it evaporates the ocean. The more it is hot, the more evaporation happens and more it will rain. Here Neem tree symbolizes penance. This is the main thing. Sitting under the neem tree means that till such time person is into spiritual practices, austerities the more he is trying to live his life in goodness, he is sitting under the Neem tree, it is very bitter and he must have the strength to take that bitterness. The bitterness is of the austerities. That is why baba when he appeared for the first time, he appeared below the Neem tree. The path of virtuousness is path of bitterness, path of spiritual practices is the path of bitterness, path of penance is path of bitterness. Sometime back I was saying that people are not understanding, you have to come to lower level. They are talking about sweetness. Baba himself did not like sweetness then how can we like it. Baba liked bitterness that is why he selected Neem tree. Till such time you are doing spiritual practices, till such time you have not obtained Siddhis till that time you have to face bitterness. It is a symbol of spiritual practices, penance, if you want to hold virtuousness then you have to face the bitterness. When Baba at the age of 16, he stayed there for 3 years, from 16 to 19 years of age, he did not speak to anyone, in cold and in hot sun, even with no clothes What does this symbolize, what is he trying to tell through this? The penance was so severe. When we also start and follow the path of merit then it will be bitter. But Baba was in penance for 3 years there, he never spoke to anyone there, it is written so. You can assume that he was completing his penance, however he had no need to do any penance, He was the Lord of the Brahmand. But he stepped down to explain to us the profundity of spiritual practices, he chose this path. He stayed for 3 years under the Neem tree and after that he disappeared from there. He did not tell anyone where he was going. No one knows where he stayed for 1 year. But after one year when his penance completed, he again appeared in Aurangabad under the Mango tree. Listen to this carefully. Now when he reappeared second time what tree was it? Mango tree. This means that Baba wants to say that if you bear that much bitterness then later there will be only sweetness in life, you will be like a Mango tree. This is the meaning. If the neem tree, Neem leaves are sweet then they are sweet like this. If you eat leaves physically, it will be bitter only. Then what did people do. They said they have said all nonsense about Saibaba, that the Neem tree there is sweet, they have spread such lies in the books but today I feel that through you the entire world will get clarity on how the journey is from Neem tree to Mango tree. It is like this. Adhyay 5 verse 9 Aurangabad mage takile, Sadechar kos ale, margat ambyache jhad lagle, tali disle he ratna. Is this Clear? In Aurangabad there is no Neem tree, there Mango tree is there. Journey started from Neem tree, journey ended at Mango tree So when we all follow the path of virtuousness then in the beginning there will be some bitterness, there will be some difficulties but if we face these difficulties, have patience, if the spiritual practices continue then a day will come when we ourselves will become a sweet tree. Now we are bitter Neem. This is the profoundness. There is one more verse which will make it clearer. Adhyay 8 verse 79 Samudriche sharodak, meghahati padata dekh, hote jaise good piyukh, te sukh jadata gurupayi. The water in the sea, you are all on the banks of the sea, it is called Gomantak. Is the sea water sweet or salty? Salty right. Sea water is salty similarly Neem tree is bitter. But if you want to make that sea water sweet, what will you do? How will you make it sweet? What is the way? Which motor will you install? What chemical will you mix? Let’s assume that you have to make the entire sea water sweet, will you be able to do it? Does anyone have the power to do that? Does science have that power to make the sea water sweet. But see how easily nature does this. When the Sun increases its temperature to 45 degrees then it creates steam and lifts the salt water and coverts it to clouds and when the water from the clouds turns into rain the same salt water becomes sweet. Who made the sea water sweet? The Sun’s heat did this. It means that the water tolerated the Sun’s heat and it rained converting it to sweetness. In the same way if we endure the bitterness of the spiritual practices, if we bear the heat of the penance then this bitter ocean will become sweet water and rain on the world. Please don’t be under the impression that this Neem leaf is sweet. It becomes sweet like this. Baba wanted to give this profundity. If you see this with gross vision, even if you take millions of rebirths, you will not have a solution. One devotee will say I find it sweet; thousands will say that they felt it was bitter and this will go on. This duality will continue. And there is no essence to this. The leelas that Baba does, in reality Baba need not do any spiritual practices, baba does not need penance. Know this well. Baba did all these leelas coming down to our level so that we understand spiritual depth, with these feeling he comes down to our level and does these leelas. There is verse which clarifies this. Adhyay 23 verse 94 Angijari vairagya purna, swaye loksangartha apan he himself is an ascetic, there is no need to do any spiritual practices, no need to do any penance, there was no need for him to come at 16 years of age and sit under the Neem tree, there was no need to bear the Sun’s heat, there was no need to endure the chill of cold. Even then he did all this so that that penance comes into our lives, that bitterness enters our life, the spiritual practices enter our lives. Angijari vairagya purna, swaye loksangartha apan, Kari Prapanchikache acharan – leads a mundane life like us, Dhyavaya shikvan acharita so that he can teach. This is the journey from Neem tree to Mango tree. Now which tree are we, all of us? We are Neem trees. We are salt water of the ocean, will become sweet water when we undergo penance, when we do penance. If the leaf is sweet then it will be sweet only through penance otherwise that leaf is bitter and will remain bitter and it is a medicine. i hope that the question which is always asked to me so i thought this topic should be unfolded",
    "Description": "शिरडी के नीम के पत्ते क्या सच में मीठे है ?\n#saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahaya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba #dashera #saibabapunyatithi #saibabavijaydashmi #saibabasamadhi #saigyan #saibabaprayer #saibabapreachings #saibabadialogue #saibabadivineteachings #दशहरा #साईबाबा #साईलीला #साईबाबासमाधी\n#shraddha #saboori #सच्ची श्रद्धा …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "neem ke patte, sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, सच्ची श्रद्धा, श्रद्धा, neem ka ped, meemkaped, neem ka mahatava",
    "Views": "22,371 views",
    "Likes": "827"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई द्वारा आम को मसलने का रहस्य | Shri Sai Satsang Goa | 29 May 2023",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Smt23ZQepz8",
    "Transcript": "It is a small play, it is a very small play, but the secret is very deep He kneads with his hand, not for two or three minutes, but for twelve years. bara varshe payi vasvta, kele gurune lahanacha motha,anna vastras nahi tota, prem potat anivar. When mangoes used to come in the Tomb/Masjid (Dwarkamai where Sai Baba lived his entire life), what did Baba used to do? It is a very small leela, but listen carefully. He used to hold mango in his hand, for example, when he talked to people, Baba used to hold them in hand and crush them. Talking to people and discussing with them but he used to go on for a long time and crush the mango by holding it in his hand. First let me take that Ovi and then let's come to that Leela. Adhyay 12 Ovi no 92 Many times Baba used to buy boxes of mangoes by spending money from his pocket and sometimes he used to bring bananas as well. And he used to distribute generously among the devotees He used to take one mango in his hand, put it between both the hands and used to rub it and then give it to the devotee. Please understand this leela well. Meaning, it is known what is the heart of a Sadhguru.After rubbing so much in his hands he use to give to a devotee, the hard part of the mango, whatever its hardness, first softened it by keeping it in both hands, the juice of the mango used to come off completely, there was no need to suck it. whole mango juice was squeezed out and put in a utensil and if you put that utensil on your lips, Baba used to soften it by rubbing and then put it on the lips and the entire juice used to come off, which comes in a bowl. Mango Seed and the peel is thrown away We all are like these mangoes, unless we are touched by babas hands, our arrogance, our body , ego pride, remains completely hard, it is Baba who takes us in His holy hands and rubs us and kneads us for ten or twelve years. There is a penance and when it reaches the state of flowing nectar, and this nectar is given back to us. Go live your life, he says . That life gets filled with nectar, the soul also gets filled with nectar, then that person doesn't return back to the world. And secondly, it throws away the filth of body, mind has garbage, rests of the soul's nectar, which is inside us, and what is the meaning of Amrut. (nectar), Amrut means Mrut means death, amrut means it is beyond.The one who is beyond death, he pours out the nectar in the soul within us forever and ever,. And our filth , ego, arrogance, thrown away like seeds and outer peel. So this is a small leela It's a small play but the mystery is very deep He rubbed/ kneaded with his hand, he did not knead for two or three minutes, he kneaded for twelve years. So, after taking it in the hand for twelve years and rubbing it, a stream of nectar is generated in it and we become entitled to that stream of nectar. And the garbage like body, mind, body pride automatically falls apart, it is a small leela, kabir ji says, \"chalti chakki dekh ke diya kabira roye do patan ke bich me sabut bacha na koi.\" Kabir started crying after seeing the moving mill, there are two parts in the hand mill, one on the top which we rotate by hand and the other on the bottom which remains stable. These two wheels represents the two polarities of life and dwindling between these two each person is left crushed Happiness, sorrow, life and death. Good, bad, right and wrong. Hindu Muslim. In this conflict, every person holds nothing in this conflict. Rahim's couplet Rahim says that this is a crooked task. If I go on the straight path, if I follow the path of faith, then I lose all the comforts and possibilities. This is a very lovely couplet. If I follow the path of faith, then all the comforts and pleasures are gone. There will be no feeling of earning money But if For the sake of comfort, I commit dishonesty, I get busy in earning money, I may get pleasures and opulence, but Ramji is left out.What should I do, both are opposite paths, if I go on the straight path, then I do not get the world's glory and worldly pleasures, and if I take the crooked path, if I get comforts and facilities, then I miss Ramji, then whether you want Ramji or comforts, it is in your hands now. It is in your hands whether you want be a mango kneaded by Him or whether you want to remain like a raw unripe mango and stay in conflict with the world. Its in your hands.",
    "Description": "साई द्वारा आम को मसलने का रहस्य | Shri Sai Satsang Goa | 29 May 2023\n📖 श्री साई सच्चरित्र । अध्याय 12 । आम बाटने की लघु कथा\n\nसाई बाबा द्वारा की गई यह छोटी सी आम लीला क्या सचमुच आम है? इस लीला में बाबा हर भक्त को आम मसलने के बाद क्यों देते है? क्या इसके पीछे कोई गहरी सीख छुपी हो सकती है?\n\nइस वीडियो में श्री कृष्णा जी के माध्यम से हम इस छोटी मगर महत्वपूर्ण लीला का रहस्य जान सकते है।\n\n 🌼 यह वीडियो बाबा के आध्यात्मिक पहलू को समझने एवम अपनी आत्मा की यात्रा की शुरवात के लिए अति महत्वपूर्ण है।\n🙏 वीडियो को देखे, अनुभव करें और आत्ममंथन करे।\n\nshort story of mango distribution \n\n📖Shri Sai Satcharitra। Chapter 12 । short story of mango distribution \n\nIs this small mango act (leela) performed by Sai Baba really ordinary?\nWhy does Baba offer the mango only after gently softening it with his hands?\nCould there be a deeper lesson hidden behind this act?\n\nIn this video, we can uncover the mystery of this small but significant leela through Shri Krishna Ji.\n\n🌼 This video is extremely important for understanding the spiritual aspect of Baba and for beginning the journey of self-realization.\n\n🙏 Watch the video, experience it, and engage in self-reflection.\n\n\n#श्रीसाईंसच्चरित्र #सत्पुरुष #महापुरुष #आध्यात्मिकयात्रा #विनायकहरिश्चंद्रठाकुर #साईंबाबा #श्रीकृष्ण #संतविचार #आत्मिकउन्नति #धर्मकीबात #spiritualindia #SaiSatcharitra #Satpurush #Mahapurush #SpiritualJourney #VinayakThakur #SaiBaba #ShriKrishna #SpiritualWisdom #PathToEnlightenment #DivineKnowledge #IndianSpirituality …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "aam ki kahani, sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, सच्ची श्रद्धा, श्रद्धा, saibaba aur aam",
    "Views": "4,657 views",
    "Likes": "344"
  },
  {
    "Title": "पदयात्रा नहीं तुम्हारी अंतरात्मा की शवयात्रा | Shirdi Satsang | 14 April 2023",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RyvUASPoYZk",
    "Transcript": "The aim of Padyatra is austerity, spiritual practices. There has to be a feeling of rigor. That these seven days I am going to observe silence and walk for Baba and if these seven days I walk with this feeling of austerity, then Baba will take care of whole year, with this feeling padyatra has to happen I am taking this topic of Padyatra. Today many palanquins come to Shirdi from far off cities by travelling on foot. 99% youth who believe in Baba, but do not know him, those who believe in him are associated with Padyatra. Some Padyatras are done correctly, many salutations to their feet. The desire to do padyatra is also compassion of Baba. It is a very nice and straight forward way of spiritual practice and a padyatra is to reach the feet of Baba. Some people to do it in a very holy and nice way. Only some people. The rest 99% people have made a joke of Padyatra Those who are doing it nicely I have nothing to say about them. I will even apply the dust of their feet to my forehead. That is the right way. But today’s youth in the name of padyatra is sidetracked, to be very honest. What is the aim of padyatra? The aim of Padyatra is penance, spiritual practices. There has to be a feeling of austerity. That these seven days I am going to observe silence and walk for Baba and if these seven days I walk with this feeling of penance, then Baba will take care of whole year, with this feeling padyatra has to happen. But there has to penance, feeling of penance. Having fun should not come even in dreams. Why should there be penance? To go near Baba’s heart. Why do we undertake padyatra? We are yet not capable of stabilizing our mind. And that is why we are laying our body at baba’s feet and we will observe silence as much as possible and chanting your name we will reach your feet. This is the spirit behind the padyatra. In earlier times what was the form of padyatra and what has it become today. I am talking about olden times. When from a far-off village anybody set off for padyatra out of selflessness, he used to tell his family while setting out of his home that I am leaving for going to Kashi, Mathura and don’t know if I will return or not. Means whilst leaving they used to leave in such a way that they did not even have any expectation of returning. These were the padyatras. But what to say of the present padyatra? When leaving for the padyatra the aim is the villages I pass through, Baba should be promoted there, there should satsang, all the suffering people met on the way should be served, environment be protected, new trees planted, with all these motives padyatras happened. There are some people who are following this. 1% people are following this. My salutations to the dust of their feet. I am not saying anything against them. But 99% of the people who are doing padyatras today, , it has become a picnic for them. In Adhyay 14 there is verse 76. Anutapavin tirthatan. Galsarivin alankaran. Putravin grahasthsadan. Shobha kavan tayachi. What is Baba saying. Anutapavin tirthatan – those who set out for padyatra if there is no repentence for your mistakes, if I am doing padyatra then I have this impurity, defect within me, I want to get rid of it today. I always eat tobacco I want to leave it; I always drink alcohol; I want to leave it, Baba. That is why for seven days without having any fun, observing silence, ontinuously chanting your name, without talking with anybody, like an austerity I will reach your court. Baba says Anutapavin tirthatan means that there has to be a feeling of removing the dirt from the mind during padyatra. I am caught up in these dirty things, I have these bad attitudes, I have become servant of the five senses, I have bad feelings towards other women, I am doing the padyatra so those feelings within me are erased. . If you leave for padyatra with such good feelings you have no idea, Samadhi mandir is far off, when you make such a resolve then that very moment Baba will be with you. Reaching the samadhi temple is a distant thing. There is one verse in Adhyay 4 verse 68. Shirdichi Saichi Samadhi. Tichi Akhil santanchi mandi. The Saibaba Samadhi in Shirdi is the resting place of all the saints of the world. Jethil marg kramita pratipadi – every step we walk when we set out for padyatra from our home, Tutate granthi jivanchi – heart gland piercing occurs, all the knots of our mind open up, all our vices are washed away, all our desires are erased. This is Sai’s Samadhi temple. Every step that we take towards Baba’s Samadhi whilst doing padyatra this happens - Tutate granthi jivanchi. This is Padyatra. I will narrate my maternal grandfather’s story. My grandfather got married, had two children then after that he had such longing for God, he did see his wife or children. He used to leave for padyatra and used to say that if I return then I am yours otherwise I belong to God Sometimes he took 10 years, sometimes 12 years and he used to visit his village. By the time he reached village his hair was long and matted and the beard also used to be long and people could not recognize him easily. He used to bathe near the well and sit and then people recognized him and that his wife would be informed and they used to run and inform my maternal grandmother that her husband was back after 12 years and with tears in her eyes she used to run and get him to the house and bathe him, had his hair shaved and she used to take care of him. Specially where youth is associated. Some youth do 6 padyatras in a year. It does not mean that they are great devotees. They do the Padyatras because they have fun and enjoy. The youth are not holding on to good things and they have bad things in their hands, now they will not leave it. To hold on to good things their hands are not free now. We are tightly holding on to bad things and our hands are now not free to hold good things. This is a good thing but we do not have time for it now. Mule kaka is sitting here. He has worked hard year after year that Sai Satcharitra reaches the hands of the youth. He says that we get the palanquin with 9000 people. He is tired of saying this but not 9 people have Sai Satcharitra in their hands. This is a very sad thing. The problem is that they are holding on to a wrong thing and the parents also feel that their child has gone for padyatra. He has left to take penance. What do the poor mothers know that they are going for fun. I again repeat myself that I am not talking about every padyatra. I am talking against those people who have made padyatra a fun and frolic scene. It is said that in earlier times in padyatra an empty pitcher was kept on head. If say a very long route of 1300 or 1500 kms, like people do the Narmada parikrama of four and a half, five or six months, they carry water in a very small bottle. They keep Mother Narmada always with them and then return to Omkareshwar and then in the same water immerse the water, after completing the whole circumambulation (Parikrama). In the earlier times an empty pitcher was kept on head and water from all the rivers on the way was collected. And after reaching the worshipped God the same was poured onto the worshipped God’s feet. What was the intention? They used to set off with an empty pitcher and when they reached it used to be filled up, taking from Ganga, Yamuna, Kaveri, Tungabhadra rivers on the way and mixing all the waters, was poured on to the feet of their worshiped God whoever it maybe. The motive behind this was, the water was the water of penance, it was the water of silence, it was water of Goodwill, that water was of the tears of repentance. Taking all this water on the head they had the spirit of pouring all this at the feet of Sadguru, observing silence, for seven days will not expect any luxuries, will not enjoy any pleasures, in those seven days did not have think of either food or drinks or anything else. Today the problem is that 90-95% youth do padyatras because they get good food. These are bitter words 95% people do padyatras because they get good food. This is not their problem. The problem is of those who organize these padyatras. They get lot of fundings, so lavish food is served. Biryanis, Chinese also, good ice-creams. I have even heard that because ice-cream was not given there was a big ruckus in the padyatra. These are our padyatras. Water of silence, penance, repentance have to be carried to the full and before it is poured on Baba’s feet, just like Krishna ran towards Sudama, Baba will come running towards you if you do it with such good feelings, you do not have to go to Samadhi temple. He will come in the middle and you need not go to Samadhi mandir. And you can empty your pitcher. But what happens is that in the beginning everyone with holy feelings starts the journey they have not walked even 4 kms and we don’t even know when that feeling fades to dust. In no time groups of 4 to 5 people are formed. Those who do padyatra will know each and everything I say. Groups of 4 to 5 people are formed and talking of useless things, at meal time the focus is on what food will be given and in this way with all the fun and frolic, this is a picnic not a padyatra. What have the rishis given us and what condition have we made of that? All the youth today participate in padyatra. They who are the future of Baba are in darkness. I am saying from this platform and it is a very dangerous thing, remember this. Please don’t laugh at this, shed as many tears as you can. Today’s youth have deviated. Those who go on padyatra I request them, die if you must but do not take any funding from outside. If your palanquins are not decorated, so be it. If your tableaux don’t come out, so be it. Do the padyatra in the simplest of the ways. Those who wish to participate in the padyatra take fees from them. From the fees that you will have, do padyatra from that amount. Don’t take any money from anybody. Don’t spoil your soul by giving it food. If the person is honest, he will give only daal, rice and rotis and observe silence, chanting Baba’s name, taking this resolution in mind, that this is the dirt within me and to wipe off this dirt I am doing padyatra, So Master, have mercy on me. If with these feelings someone wants to do padyatra then include him in your padyatra otherwise there is no need to include any person. Where 9000 people came maybe only 90 will come but that will be a true padyatra, an honest beginning. There is no need of useless crowd. You can save the youth from being sidetracked. I am requesting all the persons who take the palanquins. Don’t allow political influence to enter at all. Keep the palanquin simple. There is no need to take out procession of Baba. Baba does not want it. Instead of spending money on that take mobile toilets in the padyatra because the villager of the villages through which the padyatra goes they curse. Think of them, the environment. The money spent on food, in decorating Baba, it is not required. Instead of that the village through which you travel take mobile toilets there. The villages that you dirty, take their curses, you will be saved from that. Today I will take a story, that story will make it clearer. Adhyay 15 Cholkar’s story. You may think that why I am bringing Cholkar in the Padyatra, it will become clearer later on. Cholkar’s Story. He is from a very poor family. He gives some exam for job and he prays to Baba, that if I pass the exam and get the job then I will come to Shirdi and offer granulated sugar. And after some days his prayers are answered, he passes the exam and his job is confirmed. His job is confirmed then what he does is, he has vowed to Baba that he would come to Shirdi and offer granulated sugar to Baba. He has just got the job; he still has not got salary in hand and he wants to reach Baba’s court as soon as possible. He also does not want to borrow money because he is filled with so many values. He would rather die than borrow money from someone is one thing and secondly because I have vowed to Baba that I will reach Shirdi as soon as possible and fulfil my vow of distributing granulated sugar. He wants to reach Shirdi soon, he has promised and on the other hand he has no money in hand at present, he has not got salary as yet and I will die but not borrow money. What Options remain with him? He has to save money. That is the only option now. He saves money and more the sacrifices he makes more money he will be able to save and earlier he will reach Baba’s court. does he do? In the story it is given that the sugar that he puts in the tea, the money required for that sugar he saves that money by drinking tea without sugar. Person who can save money by not putting sugar in the tea, he must have done so many big sacrifices earlier also. He may not have purchased new clothes in Diwali and Dussehra. He may not have cooked and eaten delicious food. He may have walked up to the office instead of taking Tonga. He many have done many such sacrifices and now he is doing the same with tea. If I drink tea with sugar then money will be spent on sugar, and I will be delayed in reaching Baba’s court. He is carrying the pitcher of so many sacrifices he reaches Dwarakamai when he had some money in hand. When he reaches Baba’s court and takes darshan. The person with whom Cholkar has gone to take Baba’s darshan, he in whose room he is staying, he is about to leave after distributing granulated sugar, baba tells his friend in Dwarakamai that give him tea by putting lots of sugar. It means so many Cholkar’s sacrifices that are hidden, it appealed to Baba. Ones whose values are so deep, he is true son of Baba. Cholkar also did the journey to Shirdi, he may not have walked to Shirdi. Maybe in those times he may have travelled by train. But I can claim that Cholkar even without walking a step has more weightage than these 99% people who do the padyatras with fun and frolic. A Padyatra which has no sense of austerity, spiritual practices, sacrifices is not a padyatra it is a funeral of our inner Self. On this walking Kabirji says – Chalt Chalt kai yug gaye, Sulji na ulja maan. Kahe Kabir jage nahi, Toh Ajahun sou pahala din. If you do not awaken now then all the padyatras are of no use. Then today is your first padyatra. Because you have not done it in the correct manner. Those who take out these padyatra please save the youth of today. There is no need to spend money on Baba’s decoration, I say this again, he does not want it. here is no need of any decoration, there is no need of any sweets, delicious food is not required only daal, rotis and rice is enough because then it will become a penance. And if you reach Baba’s court with a sense of penance then blessings will shower otherwise nothing but curse will shower. In Adhyay 38 verse 138 – Asatya chalena Sai prati. Asatye nahi Saichi Prapti. Asatye jane adhogati. Anti durgati asatye. Baba does not like falsehood at all. This showing off, Baba’s decoration, Baba does not want it. Baba wants exclusive devotion. If padyatras happen in a right manner then it is very good. The reason why I am speaking so harshly is because the whole youth is connected with the padyatra and they are holding wrong thing in their hand and their hands are now not free to hold good things. A wrong thing has been given in their hands. So many youths go for these journeys 5 or 6 times that does not make them great devotees. They have got addicted. When we carry palanquin, Baba is also with us but so much nonsense talks happen. In so many padyatras Baba’s palanquin is on one side and only a person is doing the Aarti and all other people are sitting and talking nonsense. So many people have told me these things and that is why I am putting these things forward to you. No aartis are performed, also not everyone participates in these Aarti’s only 4 to 5 or 1 to 2 people are there and somehow, in some palanquins, aartis are also not done. About such people baba says in Adhyay 43, verse 123 – Parabrahma Sagunmurthi. Daive asta ushagati. Kharya karyachi houni vismruti. Vinodi priti dhariyeli. We have forgotten true penance and we did the entire padyatra with fun and frolic. After reaching Shirdi they say Baba I have come. Oh, why have you come? Baba, I have come and dance with the DJ making lot of noise. Is this padyatra? This is what a padyatra is like? There is a varkari kaka who always went on a pilgrim. One day he made a mistake of going with the Sai Padyatra. When he returned, I asked him how the padyatra was. He did not reply he only touched his ears. This is the name we have earned for Baba’s Padyatra. I will again reiterate that in the journey that has no sense of penance, that padyatra which has no sense of spiritual practices, the padyatra which has no sacrifices, if you do only with the motive of having food and fun then it is not actually Baba’s Padyatra, it is the funeral of our inner Self. Om Sai Ram. It is my humble and painful prayer at the feet of all the Chiefs of Palanquins and Padyatras. The future of all the youths is in your hands so your responsibilities are also big. Either…till date the way the padyatras happened, let it happen the same way, or, bring a revolution, change. If the motive of your padyatra is penance, sacrifice, worship then you will be become rich with a great personality and Baba will shower his merciful grace upon you. But if you do not do so then you will misguide the whole youth and our bright future. You will sidetrack them from the correct path and you will become part of a “Great Sin”. You are fee to do as you wish. Do you wish to have Baba’s blessing or bane? It’s your choice!",
    "Description": "पदयात्रा नहीं तुम्हारी अंतरात्मा की शवयात्रा | Shirdi Satsang | 14 April 2023\n\n#saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba #dashera #saibabapunyatithi #saibabavijaydashmi #saibabasamadhi #saigyan #saibabaprayer #saibabapreachings #saibabadialogue #saibabadivineteachings #दशहरा #साईबाबा #साईलीला #साईबाबासमाधी\n#shraddha #saboori #सच्ची श्रद्धा …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, सच्ची श्रद्धा, श्रद्धा, पदयात्रा, परिक्रमा, Padyatra, Parikrama, shirdi Padyatra",
    "Views": "9,870 views",
    "Likes": "449"
  },
  {
    "Title": "समय कभी बुरा नही होता I \"हम\" या \"हमारे कर्म\" बुरे होते है I",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lOekYq6eUMw",
    "Transcript": "Why is it said to be good or bad? There is an event at a particular time. There is an event at a particular time. If that event is holy, auspicious then that time is said to be auspicious. And if in that time something unfortunate happens then the time is said to be bad. So, time by itself is neither good nor bad. It has its own flow. To all the Sai devotes present here millions of Salutations and many good wishes to all of you for Intercalary Month (Adhik Mas). This Satsang has happened on the occasion of Adhik Mas. Most of you here may be knowing the importance of Adhik Mas. Adhik Mas is also known as Purushottam Mas (Purushottam Month), it is also known as Mal Mas. There are different customs and traditions. Adik Mas comes once every three years. As per the Hindu calendar the year is calculated in two ways. One is Solar calculation and other is Moon calculation. As per the Solar calculation a year has 365 days and as per the Moon calculation it has 354 days. So, there is a difference of 11 days. To cover these 11 days so once in three years that is 33 days there is one additional month. So that it is balanced. In reality every month has a Solstice (Sankranti). Surya enters one Zodiac sign every month and then there is a Solstice. So, when the Sun enters sign Capricorn (Makar Rashi) it is known as Makar Sankranti. Because there are only 12 zodiac sign and there is no 13th zodiac sign that is why in this Adhik Mas Mas because sun cannot enter any zodiac sign, the Sun does not touch this month and that is why it is also known as Mal Mas. This shows the importance of Sun. The Sun has not touched one month, , it does not see the Sun, that is why it is Mal Mas that is it is filled with dirt. So, if there is no Sun in our life then neither material nor spiritual life is possible. It is because of the Sun that this world breathes, moves and lives. If for one month it rains and there is no Sunlight, how many diseases spread? Everything has its rightful place. As much as rain is required Sunlight is also equally required. But if only one thing happens continuously then the physical health is also disturbed. The spiritual aspect of the Sun is another aspect altogether. Because the light of the Sun does not enter any Zodiac sign that is why this month is known as Mal Mas. Because this is a Mal Mas, in this month the more you do good deeds and prayers and fill yourself with devotion better it is, is the belief. But what have people done about this? They have not limited themselves to this. So, our Rishis thought why not encash this? In this Adhik Mas whatever Puja, fasting, tapas, spiritual practices are done, this will give infinite fruits, saying this they pushed us towards devotion. So that by some means our worship increases, our spiritual practices increase, devotion to God increases. What was the intention of the Rishis? They try in every way that some how humans leave the path of pleasure, leave all that is mortal and connect with the immortal Paramatma in some way or the other. With this intention it is said that if in this month even if you do some good deed, some spiritual practices, prayers and devotion then it will give infinite fruits They have given this allurement. At least in this way devotion, spiritual practices increase. But we are so dumb that when something like this is said then we get charged only for that time span. . If it is said that it has to be done for a month then we will do it for a month. So, in this month worship, spiritual practices increase. It means that unless we are bribed, we will not do worship. If you do even little then you will get limitless fruits but our devotion is such that unless we are told that this month is very important, this month is more fruitful, This is our devotion. So, the Rishi thought let us use this excuse to push humans and they tell us that in this month if you do little good deeds then it will give manifold results. They bribe us and get the worship done through us This is their compassion. So, the traditions have been going on in this way. But my aim cannot only be Adhik Mas There is also a spiritual aspect to this. Unless this spiritual aspect is opened up the tradition will continue like this only. Our problem is that we consider full moon to be auspicious, Thursday is Guru’s Day so it is auspicious. If it is Ekadashi then it is auspicious. Shravan will come soon and it comes once a year so it is auspicious. No doubt the beginning for every person happens this way only. But our problem is that we have been doing this for years and we are still stuck in the same Shravan month, Ekadashi and Thursday. When will everyday be Thursday for us? When it is full moon every day, when everyday is Ekadashi for us when everyday becomes Thursday for us then know that Sadguru’s grace has happened. Why are we stuck this way? This is because we are stuck in Sakam Bhakti. Our devotion is Sakam, selfish. If it is more fruitful then we will do it. What is the problem? It is more beneficial. If we do this much then we will get so much, then we will do. If reverse is told to us that if you do so much then you will get only this much then we will say to hell with the month. But if we are told that you do only this much and you will get so much, then we ask what that month is called. Oh, it is called Adhik Mas. Tell what more has to be done. The whole structure of our devotion is based on Sakamta. There is selfishness that is why these things appeal to us. . I believe that these things are okay to make a beginning. For beginning if Thursday is important, it is okay, if for beginning Ekadashi is important that is okay, if for beginning full moon is important, it is okay. For beginning Shravan month is important it is okay. Oh, 50 years have passed, enough now. Now also Shravan month, now also Adhik mas. Full moon is auspicious and New Moon is a bad day. Who said this. Astrology says so. Where Science of Astrology ends from there begins Spirituality. Tell me one thing. What is the difference between light of the day and the darkness of the night. . But what is our understanding is that when the Sun rises it is day and when the Sun sets it is night. But does the Sun actually rise and set. If the Sun starts rising and if the Sun starts setting then this earth will not survive. The Sun if it moves even some minute millimeters then this Earth cannot survive. The rising and setting of the Sun is not possible at all. In reality we are moving. The Sun is at its place. When we face the Sun, it is day and when we turn our back towards the Sun, it is night. Then who is creating day and night. We are doing it. maya an mayapati There is one wonderful Verse from Sai Satcharitra. Laksya lavi jo mazkade. Nahi tayasi kaichehisankade. Tochi maza jai visar pade. Maya korade udavi pai. What does this verse tell. Till such time you are facing me, you are in my light, you are standing in front of my light, you are seeing me, then darkness cannot touch you. But once you turn your back, then darkness will surround you. Means the light of Sun or the darkness of night the one who creates both is me, myself. Why is this Adhik Mas Mal Mas? Because there is no light of the Sun. In fact, this whole body is said to be Brahmand. And the intellect within is the Sun. And Mind is the Moon. Then this intellect should fill up the whole body with consciousness. But when will it fills this Brahmand, full body with consciousness, when this intellect is filled with discretion, virtue and ethics then it will be able to control the mind and the body. But if this intellect has no discretion, virtue and ethics then how will it take care of this body. If as per astrology if Mal mas comes once in three years, then our life has Mal mas from many lifetimes. Then how much devotion we need to do. As per Solar calculation Mal Mas comes once in three years but if we see our existence, then the dirt on the intellect is there from lifetimes. To remove the Mal Mas of three years how many rituals have been told. Let us do this puja, Vishnu sahastranam, Saptah, Recitation of Gyaneshwari in a week, etc. Everyone does it as per their feeling. Some read Dasbodh, some read Tukaram Gatha. To remove dirt of one month there are so many practices then what to do about this intellect which is filled with dirt for lifetimes together. There is a request that we stop looking out, let us introspect. Always remember that time is never good or bad. Time was always good, is good and will always be good. We are the ones who make the time good or bad. There is nothing like Full Moon and New Moon. There is no morning and night. Why is time said to be good or bad. An event happens at a particular time. If that event is holy, auspicious then that time is said to be auspicious. And if in that time something unfortunate happens then, the time is said to be bad. So, time by itself is neither good nor bad. It has its own flow. There is a very famous song from Bollywood, many may have heard it, it’s a romantic song. See to what depth the writer writes but we are unable to catch it. Anewala pal janewala hai you must have heard it. It is sung by Kishore Kumar. Many of you must have heard it but our attention does not go to it. There is a sentence that says Ek baar vakt se lamha gira kahi, vahan dastan mili lamha kahi nahi. That means there is an event that makes that moment alive. An incident happened. A story happened in that moment and that is why that moment is remembered. If something nice happened in that moment then you will experience happiness and if something bad happened then you will experience sadness. But in both these events time has nothing to do with it. The time simply flows. Suppose there are many moments which are pouring like drops but one drop poured in such a way, and that drop had something special which caught hold of my memory. That incident was so auspicious and pure and it stayed in my mind in such a way that I could not forget that moment in my whole life. The incident brings to life that moment. Ek baar vakt se lamha gira kahi, vahan dastan mili lamha kahi nahi. Anewala pal janewala hai. This moment is not going to last. But how much life you give to these moments by your uprightness, integrity with your good deeds that is what lives in this world, not the moments. This New moon, Full Moon, Thursday, Ekadashi, Shravan month, Adik Mas, enough of this. Have done enough. Now the transformation has to happen. Every moment is auspicious. Every moment is sacred. We have to take our mind to that state. Then no in auspiciousness can touch me. But what is our problem? We have a bad habit we do not take responsibility of our weaknesses. We do not hold ourselves responsible for our mistakes. This is Saturn period otherwise I am a great person. There is some problem with my rahu, otherwise I am a saint. The stars are in darkness otherwise I am a very good person. Our whole life is spent this way. So, time by itself is neither good or bad. Though it is called Mal Mas there is no dirt in that is what I want to say. It is said so only because the light of the Sun does not touch it. Every month when the solstice happens, this is the thirteenth month and it has no zodiac sign so how will Solstice happen.. That is why it is called Mal Mas. There is one more meaning. As you go away from the light of knowledge then everything becomes opaque. The moment you are cut off from the light that thing becomes murky. So, you are the creators of the Full Moon and the New Moon, you are the creators of Shravan Mas and you are the creators of the Mal Mas. If you take responsibility and change yourself then time also changes. Otherwise Time is neither good nor bad. Time is only Time. Time has its own stream. We make that time good or bad by our deeds. Kabir ji has a wonderful couplet on this. I will take it. Kabir Ji says listen carefully please Kabira wahi shubh din shubh ghadi,yaad ave jab naam, When the remembrance of God comes in the mind, Lagan muhurat sab jhoot , Aur bigaade kaam. When the remembrance of God comes in the mind, when the name of God rises on the tongue, we start remembering God, that is the auspicious day, that is the auspicious time. And as soon as distortion came in the mind, some wrong thought also..Karma is a far away thing, if even a wrong thought comes, you have wasted that time, messed up with dirt and ignorance. Kabira wahi shubh din shubh ghadi,yaad ave jab naam, Lagan muhurat sab jhoot , Aur bigaade kaam. In the beginning if someone is a beginners faith in God if it is resorted to for encouragement like doing Ekadashi, doing naam smaran on thursdays (its babas day) its thursday so read in chapter (Adhyay) its ok for initial support. But after 40 - 50 years have passed but still if you are stuck in Thursdays, still you are stuck in full moon, still if you are stuck in Ekadashi then you will have to do some treatment Next kabir ji says very deep, Jaha prem taha nem nahi , tahana Buddhi vyavhar, Where the stream of unwavering love is flowing, where the spirit of devotion is taking waves, there is no place for purpose and rules, there is no need to be regular, because where every pore remembers the Lord, he forgets the world. What is the need of rules and regulations for that person. There the behavior of the intellect doesn't matter and when the mind is engrossed in love, for the lord who is always engrossed in his thoughts then who counts date,day, Again I am saying that time in itself is neither good nor bad, time has its own flow its own stream, we make it good or bad by our actions, we make it by our thoughts, but day by day meditation, worship, penance should be so great that every moment becomes Thursday for us, may every moment become full moon for us, every moment becomes Ekadashi for us, may every moment become Shravan month for us, all such things happen for beginners but not who have contemplated spirituality for years. For them this is not all, for them every moment is holy, on the contrary, to go beyond time, thats the destination.Because Adhik Maas has been so hyped, that I hope my words will echo in your ears whenever Adhik Maas comes. --",
    "Description": "…",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "10,338 views",
    "Likes": "533"
  },
  {
    "Title": "ये है साई (श्री साईसच्चरित.. सार) झूठ नही सच",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cbV794PZf14&pp=0gcJCSMKAYcqIYzv",
    "Transcript": "Om Sai Ram. Oh, Precious gems of Sai. If you all take it to your heart Then every stigma attached to “Sai Baba” can be removed. These 11 Statements are the essence of the entire Sai Satcharitra. These Statements are not inspired by any selfish feelings of any devotee. These 11 Statements contain the real philosophy of Sadguru Sainath. Please let these reach every Sai devotee. Today there is a conspiracy to defame the holy image of Baba. It is the supreme responsibility of every Sai devotee to convey the truth of Sai to every human being. If you consider yourself to be true devotee of Sai then please spread this Video “This is Sai” to every human being. Millions of Salutations at the feet of all Sai devotees. Who is Sai? The 11 Statements tell this. This a request to all of you to tell the world who Sai is. First Statement - One meaning of Sai is Swami Second Statement - The one who has control over waking, dream and sleep state, He is Sai. Third Statement - Whose Ubiquity, Omniscience, Omnipotent are his servant, He is Sai. Fourth Statement - Sai is not a Saint who is beyond Maya, but he is the one who has won over Maya and has laid her to rest at his feet, He is Sai. Fifth Statement - Whose mere vision awakens hunger and thirst for spirituality, He is Sai. Sixth Statement - The one who makes the most atheist to theist, He is Sai Seventh Statement - The one whose incarnation work is to give away diamonds and pearls of Spirituality, and for whom fulfilling material desires is like giving away pebbles and stones, He is Sai. Eighth Statement - I belong to all religion or else to none, the one who has pledged this, he is Sai. Ninth Statement - Have irrefutable faith in your own religion but have equal tolerance and love for other religions, the one who gave this lesson to the world, He is Sai. Tenth Statement - No matter to which religion one belonged to, he first took away his suffering, fulfilled his desires and then increased his faith in his own religion manifold times, He is Sai. Eleventh Statement - Where there was no place in his court for the despicable word like conversion, the name of that biggest court is Sai. oh human always remember my advice that even a single drop of truth carries more weight than an ocean of lies.",
    "Description": "…",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "6,130 views",
    "Likes": "454"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई के भक्तो कीं दिनचर्या | Kalyan Satsang | Day 1 | Session 1",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DHpxlaPTEdg",
    "Transcript": "What should be the routine of a true Sai devotee? What should be the routine? This is the topic How should the day of a true Sai devotee be spent, which rule should we apply on ourselves so that our day becomes meaningful? And I am going to tell the routine of this day, I am not speaking on my own behalf but Sai Satcharitra is Baba himself whatever baba has said in sai satcharitra I keep the same in front of you as a routine. One by one as things will open, our entire day should pass like this. After having slept at night, the first step is to wake up early in the morning from the bed. This particular Ovi should be on our lips. Sai satcharitra Adhyay 3 (Chapter No 3) Ovi No 147 No other thought should come as soon as you open your eyes in the morning. This first ovi should be on your lips. laksh lavi jo maj kade, nahi taya kaichi hi sakade tochi maza jai visar pade, maya karde udvi tay So as soon as we get up in the morning this ovi should be said from our heart from our lips. We should start our day by this Ovi, And it says If we turn our face towards Baba, remember Baba, pay attention to Baba He will never come in any difficult situation of the world, whose meditation is going continuously on Baba. The one who is standing facing Baba, who is in contemplation of Baba .But as soon as I forget Baba, even for a moment this Maya takes hold of me. So first thought should be in remembrance of this ovi as we wake up in the morning. Because it is said that whatever we resolve in the morning lasts for the whole day. Every morning if we took a ride, the whole day went by, but as soon as we woke up in the morning, this dirty thing touched our hands, it is a very dangerous thing, eyes do not even remain open and the hands start searching for this thing. If this is the beginning, then you can imagine how the day will end. If someone has a habit, then keep it so far that the hand does not reach it. So as soon as we wake up, laksh lavi jo maj kade, nahi taya kaichi hi sakade tochi maza jai visar pade, maya karde udvi tay. we are feeding the brain, we have to keep the whole aim on Baba, do not forget even for a moment throughout the day. To forget baba even for a moment means to invite illusions (Maya) in our head (life). Now the Routine second Taking a bath is a part of our daily routine. While taking bath we should remember Sai satcharitra Adhyay 10 (Chapter 10 ) Ovi 151 / 152. Ganga Bhagirathi goda, krisna vena kaveri narmada, yahi vanchiti sadhun chya pada,yetil kada snanarth What a wonderful Ovi...It is said that Ganga, Bhagirathi, Godavari, Krishna, Veena, Kaveri, Narmada all these rivers keep waiting for a saint, a person of great character, when will he come to us and put his foot in my water and purify me. And these rivers say that various people from the world come to us, take a dip in our water and purify themselves. Devotees come for darshan of rivers like Ganga , yamuna, kaveri, Godavari, Narmada ... take a holy bath and purify themselves and these rivers take all sins of devotees and become impure. And they pray for a sadguru, or a saint to come and let their feet touch the water of these rivers. With this act rivers themselves get pure and virtuous again.So you can guess while having a bath we should say this Ovi requesting our sadguru to purify water by putting his feet in these rivers and that water can be used to take all our sins and purify oneself. This should be the daily routine of a true Sai devotee. Routine Third : while eating, dont just listen but it has to be put into practice as well. First of all, make a promise how many people will follow and keep this rule. Sai Satcharita Adhyay 9 (Chapter No 9) Ovi no 122 Once a Maa (Mother) Tarkhad was making bread (Roti) a dog comes to her door and she feeds that piece of bread (Roti) to the dog, then after a while a pig stained with mud comes to the mother's house, assuming that he is also hungry. Mother feeds him bread (roti), this happens in the afternoon and when mother goes to Dwarkamai in the evening, Baba says, today you fed me a lot of food. Surprisingly mother says to Baba Where did you come to my house? where did I feed you Baba? Then baba reminded her that this afternoon I came in the form of a dog, it was I , who came in the form of a pig, you understood their hunger, you yourself before eating, fed them, in reality you did not feed them but you fed me.So what does Baba says to mother regarding food.... ovi.122 aishich mazi daya janavi, bhukelya bhakar adhi dyavi, aplya pota nantr khavi, dharavi jivi he nit It is a very small thing, but if you will adopt it, it is a big lesson, it has to be maintained for whole life that even if food is prepared in the house, the effort should be start from home itself . If we are Sai devotees, we should see first that all the people in the house have eaten their stomach full, when everyone's food is finished, then we can eat what's left If you think this can happened, it's normal at home, we always plan ...it doesn't happen, we cook as much as we need for everyone and finish, But imagine, if food is prepared and two guest arrive at that time, and you request them to have meal saying that you have finished your meal, this is extra and you serve them with love and no food is left for you, even if you remained hungry and fast (upvaas) that day, because of feeding both people, so that act of being hungry or fasting (upvaas) is heavier than a thousand Shivratri fasting ,and a thousand Ekadashi fasting. So whenever you serve or eat food you should always remember this Ovi..not a single grain should be consumed without referring to this Ovi. This is the daily routine of a true Sai devotee It is said that there should be some rule to follow in Adhik Maas or Purushottam Maas, there can be no more holy rule than this . after waking up from sleep, while taking bath, while eating, we have a habit of applying Udi without taking Udi, Sai devotees' day doesn't start. How many people are here who do not apply Udi on their forehead every day? It is less means everyone applies Udi, it must be applied daily. Udi is known as Raksha (protector) The one who protects every moment is called Raksha. True Sai devotees should not start their day without Udi, While taking or applying Udi Satcharitra Adhyay 33 (Chapter No 33) Ovi no 16 udich yaa keliya charchan, aadhivyadhi hoti nirsan, Just by applying Udi on the forehead, the diseases that are there, automatically gets cured, the diseases run away. pari ya udi chya tatvat gahan, it cures our physical ailments but the question is, form where do physical diseases occur? Because knowingly or unknowingly mistakes are made by us, it goes and results in disease. What is the root of it, why do wrong deeds happen because we are full of ignorance, we are forced to do wrong deeds, and it creates disease in our body. So Udi gives us judicious mortification. And where discretion and dispassion meet, there will be no mistakes, there will be no diseases. So this Udi is that thing which nullifies the 'adi vyaadi' and that half of the diseases that come in our life due to lack of prudence and quietness. Because of not having discretion and disinterest, Udi allows discretion and disinterest to flourish inside us, fills them. At the time of smearing Udi, while drinking, this Ovi should always be on ones lips. Just do not apply without any affection...apply passionately .Look, we all are bodies, if there is a body, then there is also a disease, One or the other medicine is going on, some are going on Ayurvedic, some are going with homeopath, some are going on allopathic, some have sugar.Along with Udi, we take medicines as well, while taking medicine, we should always remember ovi and then only we should have our medicine Sai Satcharitra Adhyay no 34 ( Chapter no 34 )Ovi No 111 it says, ek saikrupevin, aushadhis nahi gunn, he ek varm hi ek khun, sadbhakt purn janti Whenever you take medicine, this Ovi should come out of the heart This feeling should spread in our veins. Healing quality is not in medicine Baba, Its in your grace. you are the one who gives us the rest. So while taking medicine remember and say this Ovi. Now the last stage of the day is sleep, the root of all diseases is not getting enough sleep.If the sleep is deep then there is no disease. Sai satcharitra Adhyay 48 (Chapter 48) Ovi no 170/171 Whatever routine I've told you, you've promised to follow. Will continue to connect with Baba on this pretext. If we make every act of the day filled with baba , then there will be no need to remember him separately; Akhand name has to be taken, its must besides it i am expositing this daily routine while taking rest, chapter 48 ovi no 170/171, hin din amhi pamar, kripa asavi anathan var ata yethuni pudhe nirantr, charni tav thar asava We are full of ignorance. We have mother, father, relatives, everyone, all family members. I am an orphan even though I am living in the midst of them as you have not accepted me yet. From today onward. Keep me engrossed in your contemplation for a moment. Keep me thinking of you every moment. In the waking state. And in the dream? Good and bad thoughts of the whole world. comes in the mind. The chain of thoughts that does not stop, there is not even a moment of peace. So whenever i sleep pray to you So at that time my ego will not come in your way, so i request you baba fill my sleep with your grace and nothing else. This prayer should be by heart. While sleeping, each and every word should be remembered with divine feelings, and while remembering Sai you will get better sleep and accordingly you will have better day. And which is an important part of the routine. Listening to the character. Reading one Adhyay (Chapter) Ovi daily. If one chapter is not read in a day, and if it's taken for granted. That means you have not lived your life. If you can't read even one chapter, you don't have time for even one chapter. Many times, I get answers like we don't get time its very hedious answer why don't you say it as reading a chapter from sai sathcritra is not at my highest priority This shows there is a lot more priorities in your life rather reading just one chapter of Sai Sat Charitra. I always believe and say that if I don't get time to bath or if you don't get time to eat or sleep less for an hour but will never ever miss reading at least one chapter (Adhyay) of Shri Sai sat Charitra. Whenever you read Adhyay, this particular Ovi should be part of daily routine. Adhyay (Chapter 41) Ovi no 163 Routines 7th Part Ovi explains as If your compassion and your grace is not there then no meaning reading Charitra. It's just waste of time. If you are not able to keep our mind stable. If you do not allow us to participate in the scriptures. If you don't give entry, then its waste of time and energy and above all understanding the chapter seems most difficult task. What is that leela telling? What is the depth of that word of yours. We will never be able to understand which jewel of knowledge to distribute. To know all this is the most difficult task. I say this with full claim Baba. You keep your grace on me. Keep your kind hand on me. Whenever I take this Granth Sai Sat Charitra (book) in my hand. Don't let Maya (illusions of the world) enter my mind. Then I will be able to reach your heart. Whatever advice you have to give me. You have to teach me. I can accept whatever light you have to give me. I will be able to understand the mystery of Leela. And i will salvage my life So, these 7 things should be in routine to be followed by true Sai devotee. After getting up from sleep, while taking bath, while eating, while taking medication, while taking Udi, while sleeping. While reciting the chapter of Sai Sat Charitra Its widely said that there are 7 levels of wisdom so believe this are Babas seven levels of wisdom. Rainbow also has seven colors. The 7 level of knowledge are also mentioned in our Vedas.",
    "Description": "#saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba #dashera #saibabapunyatithi #saibabavijaydashmi #saibabasamadhi #saigyan #saibabaprayer #saibabapreachings #saibabadialogue #saibabadivineteachings #दशहरा #साईबाबा #साईलीला #साईबाबासमाधी\n#shraddha #saboori #सच्ची श्रद्धा …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, सच्ची श्रद्धा, श्रद्धा",
    "Views": "35,814 views",
    "Likes": "1,394"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Sai Sachcharit or other crores of Sai texts | Sun or stars",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=twGMpj71VGM",
    "Transcript": "This is compared with other books. Whether there is Baba in other books or not. If other books are infinite stars in the night, then Sai Satcharitra is like the Shining Sun. Have you seen a magnifying glass. What is a magnifying glass? If we keep it in the light of Sun and if it collects all the rays together then a power is created in that and it burns the paper. Then collecting all the spiritual books of the world, it is inserted in the magnifying glass, all you need to do is concentrate and it will burn the our notion of 'i am body'. Adhyay 21 Verse 126 Agad Sainathancha mahima. Agad ayancha katha parma. Agad Saicharitrachi seema. Murth Parabrahma Avatar. This book is called Murth Parabrahma Avatar. If there is a living Parabrahma Avatar then it is this scripture, is what Baba says. I will say Baba again and again because if I say Hemadpant then its value may decrease. That is why I say again and again that this is written by Baba. There are many books that have come and many books are been written in many languages. Lots of books are been written but this book is Baba himself. If this does not come in our daily readings then very sadly, I will say we are not Baba’s devotees. Because if we do not know Baba’s will then how are we his devotes? This biography is his will. If we want to do devotion as per our wish then there is no need of this Sai Satcharitra. Then you can do worship your own way. You are free to do so. Baba is not going to catch you by your collar nor am I going to do so. That is your personal decision. You can read any book as per your wish, you can worship him as you want but if you really wish to live your life as per Baba’s will, if you want to worship as per Baba’s will then you have no other option other than Sai Satcharitra. When my video was released on this topic on YouTube there was lot of opposition saying is Baba only in your Sai Satcharitra. Is there no Baba in what other devotees have written? This question has been raised many times. I am not against them. If you feel that by reading those books you are benefitted then certainly read those books. I am not against it . But no other book can compete with Sai Satcharitra. Why because this book is Vedant Vishay ati gahan – the subject of Vedant is very deep. If there is no base of Vedant in a spiritual book then that book has no value. Vedant Vishay ati gahan virakti bhakti na jod deun, aise granth karne nirman Guru krupe hun durgat. This is that book which talks about Vedant through the medium of leelas. So please do not compare this with other books. You can read other books for information, I am not against it but for daily recitation what is written there – it is okay to skip a meal, it is okay to miss a bath in a day, it is okay to sleep less for an hour but you must not miss reading one Adhyay in a day of Sai Satcharitra.. All those sitting here promise me that you will not miss reading Sai Satcharitra even for a day. If you are promising me it means that you are promising Baba so, please take this seriously. You will understand the benefit of reading it daily in nine months. Just read only for nine months one Adhyay a day. Your life will change. You will be born again that is my guarantee. This is compared with other books. Whether there is Baba in other books or not. If other books are infinite stars in the night, then Sai Satcharitra is like the Shining Sun. Have you seen a magnifying glass. What is a magnifying glass? If we keep it in the light of Sun and if it collects all the rays together then a power is created in that and it burns the paper. Then collecting all the spiritual books of the world, it is inserted in the magnifying glass, all you need to do is concentrate and it will burn the body intelligence. This book is that magnifying glass. So, I hope you have understood what Sai Satcharitra. Kabirji says Kabira ek na janya, Bahu janya kya hoi. Ek te sab hot hai, Sabte ek na hoi. If in your lifetime you do not understand one Sai Satcharitra, even if you read all the books in the world, what will you achieve? Because all are there because of One, the One is not because of all. I remember one incidence from Vivekananda’s life. It is said that when he went to Chicago for World’s Parliament of Religion in USA, that time India did not have much reach, all the religious leaders were called first and Vivekanandji was called last. And our religious scripture Bhagwad Gita was kept at the bottom of all the other scriptures. The time was getting over and he was shown the clock stating that you have only 10 minutes, so whatever you can speak on your Hindu religion speak and conclude in 10 minutes. So, when Vivekanand begins with My Brothers and Sisters, at these words the entire congregation in the hall gave a resounding applause. And what did you do, you kept our religion and scripture Bhagwad Geeta at the bottom and kept all the other scriptures on top of it. But you don’t know that if I pull out the Bhagwad Geeta scripture which is at the bottom all the scriptures on top will topple down. Sai Satcharitra is like that. This is the root. All other books written on Baba, you can keep as many as you want on top of it, this book is willing to carry all the burdens but don’t mess with this. If this is pulled out then all the other books will fall down. Kabirji also says – Sab aye is ek mei,Daal paat phal phool. Daal means the branches paat means the leaves. Sab aye is ek mei,Daal paat phal phool. Kabir piche kya raha,Gah pakadi jab mool. It means that if you get to the roots, if you are watering the roots then the tree is going to be green, the branches will be green. There will be lots of fruits lots of flowers will bloom but it is necessary to water the roots. Similarly, Sai Satcharitra for Baba’s devotees are like the roots, the base, don’t try to shake this. Many people troubled me when this video was released so with a very burdened mind, I made a video to reply back whereas Baba says that no reply should be given to such people, such people will do such nonsense things. But with a heavy heart we made a video where Sai Satcharitra was narrating its life story, ,I present it to you and will end this talk with that. This Sai Satcharitra is telling us I am the decoration of your life, I Sai Satcharitra is the essence of your existence, where you are so engrossed in accumulating the branches and the leaves of the tree, I am the roots and the support of that tree. Why is your head so burdened with stones and pebbles of information, I am the shining Kohinoor on your forehead. Why are you so drenched with the shimmer of infinite stars which seems like the light of fireflies, not only you but the entire universe is illuminated I am that Sun. Why are you crawling like a small insect? I am the wings with which you can fly to the skies of the Absolute. Yes, I am Sai Satcharitra the essence of your life, the basis of your life.",
    "Description": "#saileela #saibaba #saisatcharitra #saileela #ekmatrasaisatcharitra #radianceofknowledge #saiparables #saibabateachings #theultimategranth #trending #saikiatmakatha #saikasandesh #saikitadap #saikiarzoo #saibabakacharitra #saileelarahasya …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "4,790 views",
    "Likes": "329"
  },
  {
    "Title": "सच जहां साई वहां",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ETpBHpVh7vA",
    "Transcript": "The question here is what is the depth of the leela? Nana had some reason and the whole thing is about that. What the reason is, is not told by Baba in the Satcharitra. That is the depth of this Satcharitra. What the reason is, is not told by Baba in the Satcharitra. That is the depth of this Satcharitra. Nana si hote kahi karan – Nana had some reason, saying this he has finished the matter. He has not stated the reason. Remember the story of Nanasaheb Nimonkar’s wife. She had to go to Belapur. Her son is ill at Belapur. He has some small illness so the mother desires to see her son at Belapur and stay there for two/four days. I will take that verse so the story becomes clear. Adhyay 12 Verse 69. So, the mother wishes to see her child and Nanasahab Nimonkar tries to stop her. Both husband and wife are serving Baba for months in Shirdi. For some reason the child is in Belapur and she wants to see her son. Her husband says that there is no reason to go there. Even if you go, return the next day. And wife wishes to stay there for four days. This a small leela but very deep. Listen carefully. Adhyay 12 Verse 69 Aso aise nischitpane. Tharale belapurche jane. Pude padale Nananche Mahnane. Udyach paratne Maghara. So Nanasaheb Nimonkar says if you wish to go then go but come back tomorrow. But the wife wants to stay for four days but in those days, wives were very humble and would not answer back and say that she wanted to stay back for four days. That era was such. Today this is not there. In present times the males need to have lot of patience. She was scared whether to ask or not. But she did not ask and kept her wish to herself. But Baba being Baba he knows what is in everyone’s heart. So Nanasaheb says return tomorrow. Verse 70 Nanasi hote kahi karan. – And nanasaheb had some reason for saying this is written. Nanasi hote kahi karan. Mahnuni Mahnati tijlagun. Ja pari ye partun. Duschitman kutumb. Nana had some reason to say that go but come tomorrow. On this Baba answers. Whoever wanted to leave Shirdi could do so only after taking his permission. That was the custom of Shirdi. When Baba was returning from Lendi Nanasaheb’s wife sees him and bows down at the feet of Baba, see what answer Baba gives without even being asked. Verse 80 Payi theuniya matha. Nigavayachi agya magata. bare lavkar ja ata. Swasth chitta asave. Go fast and go with a calm mind is what Baba says to his wife. Gelya sarakhe char divas sukhi rahi Belapuras. Vicharuniya sarvatras. Maghari Shirdis yeyi tu. It means that husband’s petition has been dismissed. The feeling that she had in her heart that she should stay for four days and come back, Baba tells her without even being asked and tells her to stay for four days and come back comfortably. The question is what is the depth of this Leela. Nana had some reason and the whole game is about that. And what the reason is not mentioned in the Satcharitra. And that is the depth of Satcharitra. He just says that Nana had some reason and has ended by saying this much. What the reason is, is not mentioned. Baba say you think. It’s like a puzzle. Give a tricky question and you keep on thinking about it the whole night. Baba leaves some question. Actually, we are not able to grasp the question. I am highlighting this so you must be understanding that yes there are these words that Nana had some reason and that is why he is asking her to come back soon. And the wife wants to stay there for four days. What was the reason? I will tell you what possibilities could be there. Firstly, in those times the males were dominating and this incidence points towards that. If I say go means go and if I say come it means you have to come. That was the tradition in those days. Baba is hitting on the masculine ego. He says that you stay there for four days So by saying this he hits Nanasaheb Nimonkar’s ego. You live all your life with this male ego, you consider your wife as a servant, drop this. Your wish, your bullying will not work. This is the first reason. Second reason is that if wife goes away for four days and there is only male member then he will have to do all the house work. And if that person is lazy and it is not in his nature to work then such a person will also ask to return soon. So, Baba is throwing light on the hidden laziness. Nana si hote kahi karan – one of the reason could be this reason. Third reason is that some men are very suspicious and do not let their wives go out of their sight. They feel that she will elope with someone. They have such terrible thinking. So, if you are going return quickly. Come back soon. Baba has refuted this attitude. This suspicious nature is not good. It’s a small issue. Nana si hote kahi Karan what the reason could be I am putting it up in front of you. And we all have such unholy attributes. I want to say that all these attributes are not good. If the wife has gone then you should have the strength to do house work for four days. Will you live your entire life off your wife? So there are three reason, first is the male ego If told to come back you should return. That is wrong. Second reason is laziness. If she goes for four/five days then will have to daily cook, clean vessels, clean the house all I will have to do. This also can be a reason The third reason is that if you are suspicious of your wife, then you will think that if she goes for three/four days then don’t know what will happen. That fear will harass you. That is why it is better that she is in front of eyes. This is the third reason and the fourth reason is if he is victim of lust then I cannot stay for five/six days without lust that is why you should return soon. This also could be a reason. That is why baba says that Nana had some reason. Saying this much he has left it at that and put your intelligence to test and find as many options as you can. This Sai Satcharitra is this deep. And this Sai Satcharitra shows us our mistakes, our ideology, our thinking, our habits. This is not a laughing matter; this is a fact. Nana si hote kahi karan if I take these words lightly then the four reasons that I tmentioned will never come up and we will never be able to work on our defects. It may be that Nimonkar must have been a very pious person and there may not have had any of the four demerits. But here we should assume that we have these qualities. Why should we speak of Nimonkar like this. We should consider that we have these qualities. This leela shows these four qualities. Men will have these demerits to some degree. Baba has tried to throw some light on this. It is not about Nimonkar otherwise family of Nimonkar will catch me by my throat and things will become difficult for me. This is not about Nimonkat, it is about all of us.",
    "Description": "✨Adhyay 12 (Ovi 56-82)✨\n🍁Unveiling the Inner Tendencies🍁\nIn this insightful discourse, Krishnaji brings to light the subtle and powerful Leela involving Sai Baba and His devotee Nimonkar. At first glance, this incident appears simple—Nimonkar urges his wife to return early from Belapur. But through Krishnaji's deep spiritual interpretation, the hidden meanings behind this moment unfold with clarity.\n\n❓Why did Nimonkar call his wife back early?\n❓Why did Baba allow her to stay back a little longer instead?\n❓What lesson was Baba pointing toward?\n\nThrough this Leela, Krishnaji explains how Baba gently reveals the 'vruttis'—the inner tendencies and attachments—present even in sincere devotees. This is more than a story—it's a mirror for all who seek to understand their own inner workings under the light of true wisdom.\n🙏🏻Om Sai Ram🙏🏻\n\n----------------------\n0:00 Introduction\n0:55 Mrs. Nimonkar’s story\n5:04 Why Nanansaheb asked his wife to return early?\n6:05 Four inner tendencies- Baba remarked upon\n10:05 Interpretation of the Leela\n----------------------\n\n✨अध्याय १२ (ओवी ५६–८२)✨\n🍁अंतर्मन की वृत्तियों का उद्घाटन🍁\nइस सूक्ष्म और प्रेरणादायक प्रवचन में, कृष्णाजी साईं बाबा और उनके भक्त निमोणकर के बीच की एक प्रभावशाली लीला को उजागर करते हैं। पहली दृष्टि में यह घटना साधारण लगती है — निमोणकर अपनी पत्नी को बेलापुर से शीघ्र लौटने के लिए कहते हैं। परंतु कृष्णाजी की गहन आध्यात्मिक दृष्टि से यह क्षण अनेक छिपे हुए अर्थों के साथ प्रकट होता है।\n\n❓निमोणकर ने अपनी पत्नी को जल्दी लौटने के लिए क्यों कहा?\n❓बाबा ने उन्हें कुछ समय और वहाँ रुकने की अनुमति क्यों दी?\n❓बाबा इस लीला के माध्यम से कौन-सा पाठ सिखाना चाहते थे?\n\nइस लीला के माध्यम से, कृष्णाजी यह स्पष्ट करते हैं कि कैसे बाबा अपने भक्तों के भीतर विद्यमान वृत्तियाँ— आंतरिक प्रवृत्तियों और आसक्तियों — को प्रकट करते हैं। यह केवल एक कथा नहीं है — यह उन सभी साधकों के लिए एक दर्पण है, जो आत्मचिंतन के माध्यम से अपने भीतर की सच्चाई को जानने की इच्छा रखते हैं।\n🙏🏻ॐ साईं राम🙏🏻\n\n#sai  #saileela #saileelas #saimiracles #krishnaji  #innerlight #spiritualwisdom #spirituality #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "5,183 views",
    "Likes": "380"
  },
  {
    "Title": "असाध्य रोग....... साई द्वारा विचित्र प्रयोग",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rYOw_b4-nuw",
    "Transcript": "If only miracle is everything, go in front of Baba and cry and the disease is cured. But why did the disease happen, what is the reason for the disease, what do you lack, what are your vices. Which desires are you a victim of, what are you ignorant about, if you do not tell this and you only diagnose the disease we will call such people magicians and not Sadguru. But Baba is a Sadguru. I will tell the Leela for the benefit of those who have not read about it so that they understand it. There was Patil of Village Narayangao of Junnar zilla of Pune district. Now know this story. It is like nectar. Verse 31 Bhimaji gharcha sukhsampana, Alyagelyasi ghali anna, Kadhi na tyache man khinna, Prasanna vadan sarvda. So much positive has been said about Bhimaji Patil. He is prosperous man. Whoever came to his house, he offered them food and he was never in sad state of mind and always had a cheerful disposition. He was such a pious person. But he got tuberculosis. He started vomiting blood. as he was from patil family there was never any dearth of money. he was shown th many doctors whatever was required was done but the disease went on escalating in those days, he wrote a letter to Nanasaheb Chandorkar explaining his state, and we all know devotion of Nanasaheb towards Baba. He wrote back saying you take my Guru’s darshan and that could be the last resort. You may get a new life. He is unable to walk so four people lift him up and put in a bullock cart and bring him to Shirdi. And four people lift him as one would lift a corpse and they bring him in front of Baba keeping him in the courtyard of Dwarakamai. Seeing him Baba says to Shama how many such thieves will you bring to my feet. This is very important. Baba never speaks unnecessarily. He addressed him as a thief. This is very important. If we miss this word then the leela will not open up. How many such thieves will you bring Shama at my feet. When we read this, a question arises in our mind, why Baba called him a thief. At the beginning he has been spoken of with respect. They have said that he was a very affluent person. He used to offer food to everyone who came. At one end he has been praised so much and what Baba says about him is how many such thieves will you bring to my feet. But perturbed he prays to Baba and baba’s heart melts. Baba says take him to cowshed. He needs such an environment and that is his medicine so keep him there. He was very rich, if he wanted, he could have stayed in some very nice place in a good house and arrangements could have been made. But Baba decided that he stays in a cowshed. And that would work as a medicine for him. Leela says that Bhimaji Patil sees two dreams and through these two dreams Baba cures him of his disease. In the first dream he is a school student and he has to recite a poem and he is unable to do so and that is why the teacher beats him with a cane on his back very badly in his dream. And he suffers very badly. This is the first dream. In the second dream, he is sleeping on his back and as one rolls a roller stone on the grinding stone, he felt someone using the roller stone and moving it over his chest and he undergoes unbearable pain. Only by undergoing these two troubles that too in dream his blood vomits stop. He gradually recovers as though Baba has gradually filled life energy, Sanjeevani shakti in him. Only by these two miracles, two instances. This is a simple leela of Junnar’s Bhimaji Patil. This story everyone has read. Those who have not read it earlier they have understood that Baba by giving him suffering through two dreams, he cured such a big disease that it was in those times. . Let us be clear that Tuberculosis of those times is equivalent to AIDS or 4th stage cancer of present times where it is difficult to recover. Tuberculosis was such a disease in olden times. If a person has reached the stage of vomiting blood, then that man will not live. But Baba with two dreams gave life to that person. We all know this dream. But the question is what is Baba trying to make us understand through this Leela. This is very important. If we miss this then even if we read this leela crores of times it means nothing.. There is no relevance if the message or the moral does not touch my heart. If I don’t reach the vedantic depth through this leela then this miracle if I read then it may excite me for a while and later it will escape my mind. But if today if I can explain the depth and touch your heart heart then whenever you read this Leela my words will be with you till your last breath. You will never forget it. If the Sai Satcharitra opens up for you then it reaches your soul and then it will never go from there. Today when I open this up, when I will give clarity on depth of this leela then this story will never be erased from your heart till your last breath. This is my challenge. This is how Sai Satcharitra is. Before coming to the depth of this story will take some verses. Listen carefully how this Satcharitra is made. Adhyay 13 verse 4 Baba says Arey zari me zalo fakir, ghar na daar befikir. Baisalo eka sthai sthir, sari kirkir tyaguni. I, a fakir leaving everything sits in the broken masjid sacrificing mundane matters Tari hi maya anivar, mala hi ganje varchevar. Me visare tari tijala na visar, maz ti nirantar kavtali. I sometimes forget Maya but she never forgets me. She does not stop troubling me. And these are Baba’s words. Baba is saying this. He is trying to tell how strong a hold Maya has on everyone. He is trying to tell how strong a hold Maya has on everyone. If Baba is saying this for himself then how alert we need to be, this every person has to understand. He says, Adimayach te harichi, tredha udavite Brahmandikanchi Te maz dubalya fakirachi varta kasi tiz pudhe. He says that this Maya bewilders the Brahman then who am I, an ordinary Fakir in front of Maya. Baba is making himself small in front of maya. Maya’s influence is so deep and hold of Maya is so strong is what he is saying. . Then he says Harich hoi jevah Prasanna tevach hoil ti vichinna. Vina avichina hari bhajan, Maya nirsan mohe pa. On one hand he shows Maya’s strength how hard and difficult it is to cross Maya and on the other hand he also shows how it can be removed. He says when God will be happy only then Maya will leave us. when we are devoted to God and remember him continuously without missing a moment, we must not forget him even for a moment, when he is continuously in our memory every moment, only then Maya will leave us. So, he has also told us the remedy. On one hand he told us that it is inaccessible and difficult and on the other hand how to come out of it is it means that not even for a moment should Baba go out of our memory. Only then we will be able to cross Maya. The question is how is Bhimaji Patil’s Leela connected to these verses. There is a deep connection. Here Baba has spoken about Maya. The whole world that we see is Maya. If I cut out God from this world then the world is Maya. But if God gives a glance, His grace happens and if we realize God then apart from God the entire world that we see also becomes God. Till such time grace happens, realization happens then this world is Maya and if Self-realization happens the whole Universe appears to be the form of Brahman. But till such time you get the experience it is Maya. This is the definition of Maya and if you see in gross form then kamini (woman) and Kanchan (Gold) are also called Maya. Attraction between man and woman, the fundamental attraction is also called Maya. In this Adhyay Maya means Kamini. . The question you may ask is why should we consider it this way. Why only kamini? Baba is talking about Maya then why consider kamini as Maya? To get the answer for this we go to the same Adhyay verse 166. The first dream where a poem was asked to be recited by Bhimaji Patil and he is unable to narrate it and that he was caned on his back. And in his dream, he had to suffer. And what was the poem? This poem holds the secret of the entire Leela. What is the poem Jis game pad anya ghruhi, theviyale ganu sarp sharir Here Sati, a chaste woman is spoken about. If she goes to other man’s house then she feels that she has her feet on the hood of the snake. Vakya jiche ati durlabh, jya pari durmil dhan lobhi kare. Sati speaks so less just like a miser who finds it difficult to take out money. She is so reticent. These are the attributes of Sati. Kanta samagam tech game sukh parvh nase zari vitta khari. She gets everything in the company of her husband even if there is not a grain of food in the house. The company of her husband is everything for her. Shant mane nij kant mate kari krutya Sati jani tich khari. And one who considers her husbands feeling before doing anything but husband has to be good, I will put this condition here. This is not true for a person where the husband is wayward. Let me clear this first. If the husband is a great person, then how should Sati be is stated here. She never goes against the words of her husband even in her dream, this is Sati. Now the question is why was Bhimaji Patil compelled to recite this poem by the teacher and why he was unable to do so? This clearly shows that he had committed the crime of adultery maybe in this life or earlier lifetime. So, Baba says you are suffering from such a big disease. He says let me tell you why you have come in clutches of this disease through the poem. Because of this crime you got this big disease. Now after reading this leela if you think of other women even in dream then this leela of Bhimaji Patil should be imprinted on your heart and mind. The question is why this poem and not some other poem. Baba begin with how difficult is Maya. It means the attraction toward other woman or other man is so dangerous and a person in his lifetime undergoes this Maya so be alert otherwise big diseases like tuberculosis will spread their arms and wait for you. This Adhyay gives us awareness of this. On one hand he made him realize his mistake. That is why you are suffering such a huge disease. Every miracle is not a miracle. If there is no light or base of knowledge behind the miracle, then that miracle is worth only a penny, it is dirt. Why was he unable to say this poem, why was he caned? There was this flaw, shortcoming, crime which he committed. That is why he asked how many such thieves will you bring to my feet? There is a very derogatory word but I have to say it otherwise the Leela will not open up. Those who spend their lives in the attraction of other woman there is a word to describe them ‘Skin Thief’. So, Baba asks how many such skin thieves will you get to my feet, Shama? It is not about Bhimaji Patil. Bhimaji Patil is alive within us. This attribute in some moment of our life must have come or will come. No person has escaped this to be very honest. If Baba has noted these leelas in Satcharitra then these things are very deep and every person in some aspect of his life goes through them. The person is attracted to other man or woman. Baba through this leela has not only brought him out of his sufferings or disease but has shown why you come in clutches of such diseases. He has stated the reason and by grinding the chest with roller stone he cured it. I believe that any Sadguru, I may have some big disease but if I am cured of the disease without realization then I would say that even Sadguru commits a crime. Do you understand what I say? If without making me realize my crime my master takes me out of the clutches of the disease Sadguru is committing a crime. But if makes the person realize the reason for the disease and then cures his disease then he is a real Sadguru. If only miracle is everything, go in front Baba and cry and you are cured, but why are you diseased, what is the reason of the disease, what do you lack, in which vices are you trapped, of what kind of desires are you a victim of, what are you ignorant of, if this is not told and only the disease is cured, then such miracle performers will be called magician and not Sadguru. Baba is a Sadguru so he did not cure the disease first, by beating him by cane he told the reason of the disease That is why he says for Bhimaji Patil how many such thieves will you bring at my feet. By thieves he meant how many such skin thieves will you bring to my feet. If in such a way Sai Satcharitra opens up then no book can compete with Sai Satcharitra.",
    "Description": "🌟 श्री साई सच्चरित्र । अध्याय 13 ।\nअसाध्य रोग - साई द्वारा विचित्र प्रयोग 🌟\n\nइस वीडियो में हम अध्याय 13 की उस अद्भुत लीला का गहन विवेचन करते हैं, जिसमें श्री साई बाबा ने भीमाजी पाटिल के असाध्य रोग को केवल \"सपने\" और \"दृढ़ श्रद्धा\" के माध्यम से ठीक कर दिया।\n\n💫 वीडियो में जानिए:\n\nभीमाजी पाटिल को क्या रोग हुआ था और इसका कारण क्या था?\n\nबाबा ने शक्तिशाली माया से छूट ने का मार्ग बताया?\n\nसपनों के माध्यम से साई ने किस प्रकार रोग का निवारण किया?\n\nसाई ने भीमाजी को \"चमड़ी चोर\" कहकर क्यों संबोधित किया?\n\nक्या आज भी हमारे भीतर भीमाजी पाटिल' जीवित है?\n\n\n🙏 श्री कृष्णा जी द्वारा प्रस्तुत विश्लेषण:\n\nलीला की आध्यात्मिक गहराई को सरल और स्पष्ट तरीके से समझाया गया है।\n\nबाबा की शिक्षाओं को आज के जीवन में कैसे उतारा जाए – इसके संकेत और सावधानियाँ।\n\nरोग के कारण और निदान दोनों को बाबा के आध्यात्मिक दृष्टिकोण से समझाया गया है।\n\n\n👉 यह वीडियो उन सभी के लिए एक प्रेरणास्रोत है जो अपने जीवन में साई के मार्गदर्शन से आध्यात्मिक उन्नति की चाह रखते हैं।\n🎥 वीडियो को अवश्य देखें, अनुभव करें, आत्मचिंतन करें और आत्ममंथन करे।\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiSatcharitra #SpiritualHealing #BhimajiPatil #SaiLeela #KrishnaJiExplanation #FaithAndPatience #DivineIntervention #SaiRam.  \n\n🌟 Shri Sai Satcharitra | Chapter 13\nThe Incurable Disease – Sai’s Extraordinary Miracle 🌟\nIn this video, we delve deep into the miraculous leela from Chapter 13, where Shri Sai Baba healed Bhimaji Patil’s incurable disease purely through the power of dreams and steadfast faith.\n\n💫 Discover inside:\n\nWhat illness afflicted Bhimaji Patil, and what was its root cause?\nHow did Baba guide him to break free from the grip of powerful maya (illusion)?\nThe fascinating way Sai cured the disease through dreams.\nWhy did Sai lovingly call Bhimaji “Chamdi Chor” (skin thief)?\nAnd even today, do we carry a ‘Bhimaji Patil’ within us?\n🙏 Presented by Shri Krishna Ji:\nA clear and simple explanation of the spiritual depth behind this leela.\nPractical insights on applying Baba’s teachings in our daily lives.\nUnderstanding the cause and cure of the disease from Baba’s spiritual perspective.\n👉 This video is an inspiration for all who seek spiritual growth through Sai’s guidance.\n🎥 Watch, experience, reflect, and embark on your own journey of self-realization.\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiSatcharitra #SpiritualHealing #BhimajiPatil #SaiLeela #KrishnaJiExplanation #FaithAndPatience #DivineIntervention #SaiRam …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, सच्ची श्रद्धा, श्रद्धा",
    "Views": "8,963 views",
    "Likes": "510"
  },
  {
    "Title": "तब जाकर होता है कोई सत्कर्म !!!",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M_ADcsZMiV0",
    "Transcript": "suppose you were at that place and you have executed that nobleness, I'll tell you how god is responsible to execute that noble deed recently Ratan Tata provided millions as a medical aid during the pandemic. And if he has a feeling that because of his aid thousands of people are living then that is conceit of his righteousness That is dangerous, but on giving that same amount if in front of baba tears run out from eyes saying that master it is your compassion that you have given me such thinking that i could help people. So today, i give complete credit of the work happened from me to you if your compassion would not have been with me then i would be able to execute this work such a person if not today then tomorrow will come out of sattva gun and will go towards incorporeal or else pride for righteousness will descend him down therefore sattva gun should also be oblated to him that it happened because of your compassion i will tell you that any good deed which is done by us, who is the doer, we think that i have done it. No we cannot do it as maya's hold on us is too extreme to make us do a good deed we cannot do a single good deed by ourselves but evil deeds we can as human is pulled towards evil doings on towards good doings for an example i see an accident while going by the road then at first compassion should arise from my heart looking at the bleeded one if he can get some medical aid in time then might live so with some help if i could take him to hospital in a vehicle and he can be treated and there i have credited the money i have and the person is cured in three days now look a good deed happened by me or you, suppose you were at that place and you have executed that nobleness, I'll tell you how god is responsible to execute that noble deed firstly, before the incident when you left the home your home environment ought to be good you should not be in quarrel with your wife understand well, if you leave your home after having a quarrel with your wife which makes your mind agitated then you will indifferent the accident though you had it in your sight as no such bad environment was kept by the master in your home is His first blessing and as your heart was filled with mercy to save the man is master's second blessing and your body possessed the power to lift the injured and put him in the vehicle that power is third blessing and that you had enough bank balance to pay the hospital bill is the fourth blessing meaning after moving successfully through all these phases you were able to execute and you have no hand in anything Would you have been able to serve if you had a fight with your wife? would you have been able to serve if there would be dearth of money? would you have been able to serve if lord had not filled your heart with compassion? that means there are many factors behind a good deed therefore never take its credit give it to baba without his mercy you cannot perform on right deed not even for you family because of so many pillars one apex of goodness stands tall then to say that i have done the noble task what can be the most ignorant than this? how easily man is allured into pride of being a doer even a single small work cannot be done on our own without the mercy of lord therefore whenever a good deed happens one should thank baba with tears in eyes saying that lord it was your will to make it happen as ignoble like me cannot do it.",
    "Description": "#saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja \n#saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba #dashera #saibabapunyatithi #saibabavijaydashmi #saibabasamadhi #saigyan #saibabaprayer #saibabapreachings #saibabadialogue #saibabadivineteachings #दशहरा #साईबाबा #साईलीला #साईबाबासमाधी\n#shraddha #saboori #सच्ची श्रद्धा …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "5,462 views",
    "Likes": "386"
  },
  {
    "Title": "शिरडी... जो नर को नारायण बना दे ॥",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oHbcDaUvs1g",
    "Transcript": "We have come to Shirdi many times, so we all know the gross form (Sthul swaroop) of Shirdi. Shirdi means Samadhi Mandir,Shirdi means Dwarkamai Shirdi means Gurusthan Shirdi means Chavadi shirdi is first of all a spiritual region. If we look at the spiritual aspects of Shirdi through Sai Satcharitra, then we could know how did Shirdi become a spiritual region, Today I will show you a different Shirdi. Please listen carefully to what I am going to say now with an empty, concentrated mind. I promise you will see a different Shirdi for the first time. Look, there is a Ovi written on the back. \" Purn bramha swaproopachyut, aisa ha jivatma purvavat, kadhitari swaswaroopa prat, pavava nishrit he dhey\" It means that O, human being, you have slipped down from the form of Absolute Brahma, moving about being a ordinary human in this society, then you will get back again you will have to travel till the complete Brahma, you have to reach from the human soul to the soul of the divine, this is what ovi means. getting back to the form, the absolute Brahma Swaroop This is sure goal of human birth. This is a goal of Sai Satcharitra. This is only goal of Sai Baba. How this Shirdi takes us to the goal, we will see today how Shirdi completes the journey to the Supreme Brahman, why is this region called the spiritual region, Today I will show you a different Shirdi. If you listen carefully, then today onwards, you will see Shirdi from my vision. you must have seen physical shirdi. Here there are many people who visit shirdi plenty in a month but What is the real and spiritual aspect of Shirdi, Today I present to you, hope it will touch your heart. And whenever you visit Shirdi, whenever you visit Chavadi, whenever you visit DwarkaMai, you will definitely remember my words, so as this ovi says, we have to reach from where we have slipped to this human realm, you should recede to bramhan state, this is the only goal, this is the only goal of being a human being, goal of Sai Satcharitra. This is only goal of Sai Baba, How do we reach this Shirdi area lets see.. Chapter 8 verse no 53 (Sai Satcharitra) \"vinashi nar karit sadhan, hoil avinashi narayan nardehasam sadhansampn, duja n ann ye shrusti\" we are all living beings, we are all perishable and one day we are going to leave this body. If you do penance in the right way, then this perishable Human (Nar) will turn into an imperishable Divine Being (Narayan). It has been said that this human birth is the most virtuous of the 8400000 (84 lakh) species in the whole universe. After getting this human birth, it is considered to be the second fate to wake up to the feeling of liberation or salvation. And after awakening that feeling, if a Sadguru like Sai Baba is found, then the birth becomes meaningful Because human birth, Mumukshutva (the burning desire for liberation freedom and self realization) and the third is Sadguru like Baba, the one who has all these three in one's life can become imperishable Divine Being (Narayan).This is what ovi is trying to tell us. So how this Shirdi makes a perishable man, an ordinary man into an imperishable Narayan, How does shirdi help us in this growth? I will explain in detail so from now onward you will see it from a new perspective from a spiritual point of view. Chapter 10 ovi 57 (Sai satcharitra) \"Pahuni shisyachi badhata, aati kalvala jayache chitta, kaisi ladhel dehatitta, hechi chita aharnish\" The disciple who is bound in shackles, the one whose heart melts on seeing this, and he (Baba) remains engrossed day and night in the worry of how to break his bondage, that is Sadguru. A couplet by kabir, A captive meets a Guru who is also in bondage because now a days there are lot such Gurus but sadguru like sai is emancipated hence he can salvage us so guru who himself is tied up will not be able to untie the knot of the heart whose hands are open like our even for a moment if we serve him we are free from all bondage. So how does shirdi help to attain Narayan will understand. First of all, whenever we come to Shirdi, we make a rush to visit the Samadhi Temple and if time permits, we visit the Dwarkamai ,Chavadi ,gurusthan etc.... We are always long for samadhi mandir. We always give first preference to it and later if we get time then we see the rest of the places, if you don't get time or for some reason you get stuck in something else then you go straight. But if you talk about spiritual Shirdi then first of all we should visit Dwarkamai because baba has incinerated sacred fire there (dhuni), without dhuni's darshan initiation of spiritual journey is impossible I will explain Only one verse is dedicated to dwarkamai chapter 13 verse no 73 (Sai satcharitra) Please listen carefully, if someone is drowned in the ocean of distress till his throat, even if he is buried in the pit of great sorrow, The one who climbs the stairs of Dwarkamai, it is as if he is stable on the seat of happiness. Such a big thing has been said about Dwarkamai, i have a request to Sai administration (Sai Sansthan) if this Ovi comes on the board of Dwarkamai, then many devotees will be welfare and benefited. Because there is no such holy Ovi in the entire Sai Satcharitra about the holy Dwarkamai. Those who can talk in the sansthan, I have a request to them, please this Ovi should be written in golden letters on the board of dwarkamai, it is so sacred. I said that our spiritual journey starts from Dwarkamai as there dhuni, the sacred perpetual fire is burning. Chapter 5 Ovi no 93 (Sai satcharitra) What is the purpose of lightning Dhuni (Sacred ash)? Why did Baba sit 24 hours by lighting a fire/Dhuni? \"ahaankar vasanasamaveti, nanavidh vrittichya ahuti, prapanchpravrutti samagr haviti, yuktiprayukti dhunit\" The reason behind is all the ego all the lusts inside us desire of word, form, taste, touch, smell, along with six vile of our mind which are lust, anger, greed, sense of I, Attachment and Partiality/Envy/Jealousy All these wrong instincts and all of our worldly desire is sacrificed in the dhuni (sacred fire) we are perishable human because all these are present within us. We have pride we have desires, We're full of filth of the world. That's why we all have to first burn in Baba's dhuni, where we can become like a Gem or as 24 carat gold. that's why our spiritual journey begins at Dwarkamai. Where all our evils can be burnt can be destroyed in ashes in divine fire.(Dhuni) Nothing will happen by going to the samadhi temple by running, because our status, our eligibility is still limited to Dwarkamai, there are lot of sins and vices to be burn and lot to be washed. That's why the first step is Dwarkamai. Guru kumhar shish kumbh hai, Gadhi gadhi kadhai khot.Antar hath sahar dai, Bahar chot pe chot",
    "Description": "#saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja \n#saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba #dashera #saibabapunyatithi #saibabavijaydashmi #saibabasamadhi #saigyan #saibabaprayer #saibabapreachings #saibabadialogue #saibabadivineteachings #दशहरा #साईबाबा #साईलीला #साईबाबासमाधी\n#shraddha #saboori #सच्ची श्रद्धा …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "19,120 views",
    "Likes": "830"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई का जन्म ही नही तो जन्मस्थान कहाँ से ? - Controversy 3",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a3uEA6DBMnE",
    "Transcript": "what baba wants to say about his birthplace in Sai satcharitra is important to us. what others have to say about it is not our concern there is always a controversy regarding baba's birthplace that he was born in pathardi. this is the belief of some and was also a topic of debate. But What baba says about his birthplace in saisatcharitra is important to us. what others have to say about it is not our concern. But what baba wants to say about his birthplace is of importance Firstly, has baba been born? Because Ovi 112 from chapter 4 of charita says, prkat tachi bramha gyani, nahi vishay vasana swapni, Maya tyagili lathe hanuni, mukti charni vinatli. It's says, Appeared with the knowledge of bramhan that he appeared under the neem tree at the age of 16 that means it gives certainty for being appeared without the aid of mother's womb And as if Maya is shoed off kicking, who has reign over Maya And Mukti, by becoming his slave, remains at his feet . Such is these verse's quotations So who was not conceived into a mother's womb its indisputable Charitra says, He appeared inside the womb of gurusthan after 12 years of austerity. with this point of view, gurusthan is his birthplace and dwarkamai is his residence chavadi is his sleeping place, and his samadhi mandir is refuge place to all yogis, sages, saints it becomes clear that he appeared as a bramhagyani and for saints, kabirji says,\"every land is like the banares and any ordinary water is like one from Ganges and for a wise all are no one but ram as heart has become pure chapter 43 ovi 147, in the chavadi his presence is invisible, in the mosque it is in the form of brahman, in the samadhi mandir in a state of samadhi, while everyone else it is a joy incarnate in chavadi he is invisible as to perform 64 arts forms as of krishna in the mosque he lives as universal being, in deep meditation in samadhi mandir and joyous evrywhere and anyway it is said that one should not try to find birthplace of saints and origin of rivers, and kabir ji says, caste is our soul, vital airs is our name, eternal is our and sky is our village This is the whole sky, the whole sky is my village So for a true sage, for a true saint, for a true Satguru The whole sky, the whole earth is his abode. This is what of Kabir ji says but what does Sai baba himself says about his birth place in sai satcharitra let's hear. Chapter 4 Ovi no 113 (Sai Satcharitra) janm babancha konya deshi, athva konya pavitra vanshi, konya mata pitryanchya kushi he konashi thave na No one knows in which country Baba was born, in which village or in which pious clan, in the womb of which mother and father no one knows. No one knows about baba's initial 16 years of his life. No one could know who was his mother or father. People tried a lot but no one could solve this mystery. When Baba appeared at the age of 16, people were tired asking him, When baba was alive people used to enquire about his parents, his place of birth, his lineage but baba didn't answer Baba did not consider it appropriate to answer. If Baba had to tell, he would have told about his whereabouts. sodinu mata pita aapt, gangot ani jaat paat, tyaguni sakal sansarjaat, prakatla janhitarth shirdila - appeared, said again. he one who has come from the whole world, the chief of renunciation has appeared, the illusory world of the whole world (Mother,father, creed, religion), he has appeared by renunciation, for the interest and benefits of the people in Shirdi. It was not Baba's will to tell about his place of birth, it was not his will to tell about his parents when he did not want to tell, why should we search for his place of birth? Why is it necessary? If he is our Guru, we call him Sachchidanand Sadguru Sainath Maharaj, then it is our first duty to respect his wish. If it was his wish not to tell, the matter ends there. And also it is said that the workplace is a million times better than the place of birth. Although Krishna was born in Mathura in a prison, but even today Krishna is known for Vrindavan Where he performed leelas, where he endued life teachings, Krishna is known for Kurukshetra where he gave the Bhagavad Gita, this sacred place shirdi is workplace of Sai That's why I say his birth place is where he appeared at the age of 12 years, GURUSTHAN is his birth place To investigate means to go against baba's will, to go against his feelings, its nothing less than informative knowledge. This is the basic difference between educational knowledge and informative knowledge. The one who does not get entry into Sai Satcharitra starts searching here and there thinking that he has the only knowledge, spending his whole life reading various this books, because one does not get entry in Sai satcharitra easily. There are so many people who call themselves scholars, they have been propagating about Baba for years, then why not a single leela of his character has been revealed, why the leela has not been revealed, this is a question; Why is this secret of Baba's heart not revealed? Every leela of baba is a Gem. So why could so-called scholars not reach it? Because in order to enter this book, purification of the mind is required and above all one needs selfless devotion (Nishkam Bhakti), You will be born millions of times,reading sai satcharitra million times with fruitful devotion (Sakam Bhakti) you will never be able to reap its benefits. With fruitful devotion (Sakam Bhakti) you will not understand leela or achieve a single word of wisdom. The qualification required for this is selflessness. Without selfishness, if your devotion is constant in Baba's feet, why won't Baba give you this Bodh Ratna (Spiritual wisdom)? Why would he deprive you?He wants to share this wisdom with everyone, why didn't even a single leela open, I had asked a question a while back, Banjara or Satguru From today, whenever you go to the Samadhi temple, this question will arise, are we seeing Banjara or Sadhguru, because if you want to do bhakti as per your own wish, and do not want to know Baba's wish, then despite being the hero of the universe (Brahmand Nayak) you made him Outcasts Gypsy (Banjara) He is the hero of the universe, Samarth Sadhguru, there is no doubt about him, but because of doing devotion randomly on your own, you made him stand at the place of an ordinary Gypsy. And if you try to bring about the same change knowing Babas wish, then you have made him the hero of the universe, Satguru. Either you keep him as a ordinary banjara by worshiping as per your choice or after knowing his heart and knowing the yearning of his heart, make him the hero of the universe, Satguru, that is in your hand. Your choice, your wish. Yes but it is my duty to tell you. Baba has never explained anything at the gunpoint, never, no lord has done. Baba has put the reality in front of you rest it's your choice. You can do bhakti as per your wish then you can recite that melody..Jaya Mani Jaisa Bhav Taya Taisa Anubhav\", it is the talk of the nursery child. it is the talk of the nursery child...not just getting out of the nursery still we have not grown up. If Baba did not want to tell about his place of birth, then we are going against his wish by investigating unnecessarily. Matter needs closure. we are going against baba then going against his will to gather information, all sort of evidences doing this and that what is the need? we are going against baba .. how are we his bhaktas?And the reason for all these things is that we do not know His will, we do not get entry into Sai Satcharitra I have only one request for all scholars i know its difficult to get entry in sai satcharitra but for only 9 months ....keep a little patience, read one chapter daily of sai satcharitra why will baba's heart not melt? He will give you an entry for sure. The day you get an entry in Sai Satcharitra, you will be in tears. This is my prayer to all. ek na janiyain, to bahu janayain kya hoi, ek tai sab hot hai, sab tai ek na hoi This dispute about the place of birth, then we head back again towards, if we conduct as per his sayings then only we have given him a seat to sit rest we are under the illusion that we have made him sit on the Golden throne ... everything is rubbish in baba's eyes in his view the one who follows his vows walks on his wish and knows his wish, provides him seat he gives me a seat, he feeds me to my stomach, quenched my thirst with his water, and if If you are not able to do this then Baba cannot agree with whatever decorations are there in Samadhi Temple, yes, it is the feelings of the devotees, they have done all the decorations, they have their own feelings, But if we see from baba's eyes he doesn't require all these. I am not saying anything against the devotees, that is their devotion, their feelings are their wishes, but what is Baba's perspective, I am conveying that. some might say i have said something wrong about samadhi mandir. Please you must be able to understand my intentions . Baba is not happy with all those things The way to please Baba is by understanding his wish. We have to live according to baba's teachings, we have to change ourselves according to Baba, then Baba will be happy, Baba willingly keep on giving us entry in his heart and he will keep on opening his heart Otherwise, we will keep on wandering by taking baba's name like we were wandering in the forest, without reaching our destination",
    "Description": "#saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja \n#saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba #dashera #saibabapunyatithi #saibabavijaydashmi #saibabasamadhi #saigyan #saibabaprayer #saibabapreachings #saibabadialogue #saibabadivineteachings #दशहरा #साईबाबा #साईलीला #साईबाबासमाधी\n#shraddha #saboori #सच्ची श्रद्धा …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, सच्ची श्रद्धा, श्रद्धा",
    "Views": "11,405 views",
    "Likes": "600"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई न हिंदू न मुसलमान ....... आखिरकार विवाद का अंत !!! Controversy - 2",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8d1li62mwvA",
    "Transcript": ".. baba always used to say allah Malik ..giving reference of a small book translated in hindi which does not contain sai satcharitra completely He used to live in mosque so he is Muslim. He used to eat and serve non veg and used to read fatiha that's why he is Muslim. Today I am going to discuss a very important topic about chaos created on social media, proving that Sai Baba is Muslim (mohammedan) Many videos are broadcast ... at least 4 new videos are circulated daily on social media to propagate that baba is Muslim.. .. baba always used to say allah Malik ..giving reference of a small book translated in hindi which does not contain sai satcharitra completely and does not show Sai true character. He used to live in mosque so he is Muslim. He used to eat and serve non veg and used to read fatiha that's why he is Muslim. Every possible effort is going on to prove that baba is Muslim Muslim Don't know what benefits they are getting from these rumors they are spreading , only God knows, but all efforts are being made to convert sai baba into Muslim. so all hindus will isolate themselves from baba. So I will discuss the topic is Sai Baba Hindu or Musalman ? First of all, what does our Sanatan Dharma say about religion. There is a famous verse in Rigveda which says Ekam Sat Vipra Bahudha Vadanti Truth is one, Religion is only one but the intellectuals, the wise and the experienced people call truth by different names. Vasudev Kutumbakam The slogan of our Sanatan Dharma is Vasudev Kutumbakam Vasudha means earth Every living being on earth, every person, every caste, every religion and community is our family, this is our Sanatan Dharma and we are worshipers of Krishna. He our favorite .we speak about krishna 'krishnam vande jagat guru' When we call Krishna the Jagatguru then does he become the Guru of only Hindus, doesn't become the Guru of Muslims did he not become the Guru of parsis or sikhs? After saying krishnam vande jagat guru, He becomes teacher for every religion, every community, every sector,this is the teaching of Sanatan Dharma Why the conspiracy to bind Baba in one religion, what will be achieved, what is the purpose behind it? I just take some ovi from sai satcharitra which will clear doubts about baba. Chapter 7 ovi no 13,14, 17,20 It says that if we call Baba a Muslim then his ears were pierced (i.e. had holes ,according to hindu custom) and if you think he was hindu he was circumcised. we should not go deeper in these arguments. If baba is there then he belongs to all religions and if not then he does not belong to any religion. That's why don't divide Baba into Hindu religion or Muslim religion. He is beyond all religions. If we call Baba a Hindu then he used to always reside in the Masjid, if Mohammeden, he had always the Dhuni-sacred fire there and the following things which are contrary to Muslim religion. And if you think baba was Muslim then the best of brahmins and agnihotris living a side there orthodox way fell prostrate at his feet. . This is no wonder for he who completely surrender himself to the Lord by getting rid of his egoism and body consciousness does become one with him and has nothing to do with any questions of nationality saw no difference between any caste, sects, religion or even between beings who were seen with the same vision. And this reality of Sai Baba, but nowadays there is an attempt to forcefully link Baba with one religion, Baba is a Muslim, Baba is a Muslim, Baba is a Muslim, and what else? The problem today that those people are able to do it very easily because today we do not have Sai Satcharitra in our hand like if we want to understand Ram then there is Ramayana, if we want to understand Krishna then there is Bhagwat Mahapuran, similarly if we want to understand Baba then Shri Sai Satcharitra is the proof. But this is our bad luck we don't have Sai Satcharitra in our hands every person like without reading Ramayana they will not believe in Ram, will not know Krishna without reading Bhagwat similarly without reading Sai Satcharitra how will understand Sai baba No one can know Allah without reading Quran, similarly before saying anything about Baba, first read Sai satcharitra with faith understand Sai's true character and then speak. It is our misfortune that we cannot read the big Granth, that is why the Sansthan was Forced to translate the original book in small book and today things are not completely clear in that book, then this small book is shown again and again, its pages are opened pointing various things which is not clear, so Baba used to say Allah Malik here, look here, Baba used to live in the Masjid, that's all, what will you talk about the ovis which i translated now?. Now i will explain chapter 7 36 ovi Baba got almost all the temples in Shirdi repair through Tatya Patil the temples of Shani ganpati Shankar Parvati village deity and Hanuman were put in order and we will bind Sai baba with Muslim religion. And there is also a propaganda about Baba that he always used to say Allah Malik, Allah Malik was always on his tongue, this is true, there is no doubt about it, , but at the same time, How many times did he praise Rama, how many times did he praise Krishna and Vitthal, and how many times did he praise Shankar, He used to tell his devotee to read Vishnu Sahasranama pothi, but all that was not seen, only Allah Malik words were pointed Those who used to say that Baba always says Allah Malik, this is the answer for them Chapter 13 ovi 4 Though I am Fakir have no house or wife i am staying in mosque care free and though leaving all care I stay at one place the Inevitable Maya teases me often though I forgot myself but she cannot forgot me she always envelops me. This Maya [illusive power] of the Lord Sri Hari...see here he doesn't say AllahMalik ... he says hari ..., when baba wanted to say Allah,he said Allah, the aim was to see all religions from a pure perspective He says Maya harasses even Lord Brahma and others. ... Then what to speak of a poor Fakir like me? Those who take refuge in Hari will be freed from her clutches with his grace. Not to forget Hari bhajan even for a moment, till I don't do it, Maya is not going to leave me, so where did Allah Malik come from Allah malik is only visible, now here Hari has been praised so much, what will you say about him, what are you going to get by making him a Muslim? There is only one Sai Baba,who has given the message of equality of all religions to the world And today you will point finger at him. The incarnation comes with the light of the whole vastness in the world and today you would like to extinguish the same light with your hands... ... but baba is not a small lamp.. Baba is the big bright shining sun. now I will take in the 42nd chapter of this Sai satcharitra, which will make things very clear. On the day of Dussehra 'seemollanghan' baba took his entire clothes and threw them in the dhuni and he stood naked with his burning red eyes shouted at the villagers and said ; entire life you fellows troubled me asking if i am hindu or Muslim.. .. now have a look and decide finally whether I am Muslim. What did Baba want to tell us through this leela, , what was the meaning of standing naked, many people have a question in their mind, Baba's circumcision happened or not, accordingly you can see and on that basis you people can decide my religion. But why would baba do this act? If baba is circumcised then he is Muslim and if not then he is hindu. And in both the cases baba's life teachings are clashed by this leela. Everyone's master is one, all religions are equal, the speakers will be on one side, otherwise what does Baba want to explain to us through this leela? Standing naked and telling people to decide whether I am Hindu or Muslim this leela opens and sums up exactly Baba's entire teachings . chapter 42 ovi 42 And not only did he just suggest this, but demonstrated it himself, giving them the actual experience, by offering a pure, white piece of cloth i.e body to the fire of yoga on the same day. and now when I am standing naked in front of you it's not just a body its bright virtuous soul, this soul has neither religion nor caste. Like there is a verse in Bhagavad Gita which will make Baba's Leela more clear. What is the meaning of this Leela? As a person takes off his clothes and throws them away, similarly the soul, when this body becomes old,becomes weak and fragile, this body falls(dies) and the soul does not die.Soul takes another birth again it takes another form. Similarly Baba puts this name, this fame, this religion, this caste all this in the fire in the form of clothes and the one who was standing naked was standing as a capital form (body) and he is saying ask this soul whether it is the soul of a Hindu or a Muslim. This leela is so big and deep. Krisha says that when clothes are old they are thrown away, similar when a body dies, the soul takes and covers up in a new body. We all have covered up our souls in some or other way. Some have covered up in Hindu religion, few as different gurus disciples, ..these covering it's all rubbish. If we burn these differences and disputes what remains is the soul which is in the form of a beam of light. Through this leela baba makes this clear that you are not of any religion , caste, you are the soul of light... pure light The one who has given such a great education, has given such a great knowledge, we want to bind him (Baba) in one religion, in one sector In Bhagavad gita Shloka Krishna says to Arjuna I am the soul and I am present in all beings I am the beginning, the middle and the end. Baba has not only given the knowledge but through experience of the whole life that I am that soul, I am present everywhere, I am shining in every living being. He has given ample of example. Perhaps you want to keep Krishna tied to Hindu religion only, you want to make Krishna as small as you have a small vision, then why will you leave Sai Baba. Kabir ji says (kabirs doha) that we must not ask a saint his caste. If we have to know anything about him, that must be his knowledge. In the same way, we must bargain for the sword without giving importance to sheath. . In other words, we must give importance to internal quality.We should give Importance to knowledge wherever you get it, whoever you meet, take it with your head bowed whether it is a Muslim, a Hindu, a Parsi, a sikh, , wherever you get light, take it with your head bowed,you should have the wisdom to bow down.And at one place Kabir ji says a very lovely couplet, listen carefully Kabir says well is one .well of spiritual joy, Sachchidanand, who is God well is only one, there are many people who fill water from it and everyone has a unique utensil, that is, this religion , Hindu, Muslim, Sikh, Christian,but the water is same in all, because the water of the well is the same, Sachchidanand, who is God, he is one, you call him Allah, you call him Ishwar, you call him Ram, you call him Rahim. It is said that there are titles which have to be dropped, only then they reach the ultimate truth. The biggest title is the title of religion, that too has to be dropped. that is why in the entire Sai Satcharitra, one person whose feet should be washed and drunk is Dr. Pandit Eleventh Chapter11 Dr. Pandit considered baba a Muslim Fakir and he himself is a disciple of a Hindu Guru, but there is so much devotion towards his Guru that wherever he looks he sees only his Guru No one even dares to apply Tilak on Baba's forehead and Dr. The pandit puts on the full Tripund and Baba bows his head and accepts it. Seeing this Dada Kelkar ask Baba , you showed this discrimination, why did you do this, ours do not even apply Tilak and you have applied the full Tripund of Dr. Pandit, Baba says that he is a disciple of a Brahmin and he used to consider me yavan(Muslim), in spite of that He saw his Guru in me and as he used to apply Tripund to his Guru, he applied it in the same way, what is my status in front of his Guru Bhakti, Brahma Vishnu Mahesh will also come then they will have to bow down towards Dr Pandits Guru Bhakti So people of all religions, be it Muslim, be it Hindu, be it parsi whoever should learn from this Leela of Dr. Pandit,every human being has got birth, so this Leela should be recited to every person.Then these walls will fall Dr. Pandit did not lose his Hindu religion by applying Tilak to Baba, he is considering Baba as Yavan, but there is no pain or anxiety , for the same time as he used to pray his Guru, same way he worshiped Baba no matter what religion you belongs to, follow all religions wholeheartedly, if a person knows this much, then this world will become a very good place to live if not, then history is witness to the amount of blood that has been shed in the name of religion and hasn't been made for a any other reason .And history should not be forgotten by any human being. And now I come to the story of Rohilla, it is a very important story, because when it comes to religion, without the story of Rohilla will not be complete. . Chapter 3 (sai satcharitra) Rohilla is a Muslim Pathan, full of devotion to Baba. He is equally fanatic about his religion. recites verses of Quran, chants Allah Hu Akbar and chants it so loudly that all the Shirdi villagers get upset. And one day all villagers went to pray Baba and started complaining that Rohilla is troubling us a lot, we work hard in the fields, sweat all day, and when we come home exhausted at night he doesn't even let us sleep, he chants Allah Hu Akbar every night untimely This is how the whole village prays to Baba. Now Baba tells a strange story to the villagers. He says that Rohilla's wife is very unworthy. As long as he keeps on reading Kalma, his wife does not leave his house , but as soon as he stops reciting Kalma, she comes running to me and disturbs me me so this Rohilla who is always chanting naam isn't a benefactor for my sake because when he chants i am at peace. but as soon as he stops the name, his wife comes to me. . Baba gave this very strange answer, which the villagers did not understand. Baba told villagers to go to their homes respectively and try to sleep peacefully. Villagers maybe got annoyed at baba but could not go against baba's words. What does this story tell here?The question is what is the depth of the story Baba wants to tell that I am sitting in the heart of the Rohilla as the intercessor. These words were not spoken to villagers by Baba who was sitting in Dwarkamai but was spoken by Baba who was sitting in the heart of Rohilla as intercessor. Infact rohilla never had a wife and by his wife Baba meant Durbuddhi i.e. evil thoughts I (sai baba) only resides in his heart. Such a deep thought.Even if even a single wrong thought arises in our mind, then our inner Sai Baba gets troubled, it should not be forgotten. That's why Baba says that this man chants Allah Hu Akbar in order to drive away evil thoughts(Rohillas wife). Baba says that in entire village only one person thats Rohilla understand his evil thoughts and to rid off he recites Allahs name...you are been sleeping since births and still talking about sleep. So baba never saw any religion, caste any discrimination such is our sai baba. Baba saw faith in one person on the contrary baba took the villagers to task and asked them to mind their own business saying that you have slept all your life, and we raise questions on the such messiah who has so much truth. We try to tie baba in Hindu or Muslim. This story is about Chandorkar and Binniwalle. This story is exactly opposite. Nanasaheb Chandorkar is connected to Baba for many years. He is ardent devotee of Baba. Baba is everything for him. His faith in Baba is so strong that he cannot see anything else. His co-brother that is his wife's sister's husband, Binniwalle, once said that I want to take Baba's darshan. So, he brings him from Kopergaon. On the way there is Dutta Mandir which is his worshiped deity and believes in Dutta so he says “Chandorkar I want to take Darshan of Dutta. So let us take Darshan and then go to Shirdi.” Chandorkar says that your Dutta is not going anywhere. Let us go to Shirdi first. So not paying heed to his emotions he gets Binniwalle to Shirdi. As soon as they reach Dwarakamai, Baba asks Chandorkar that you have been with me for past so many years this is what you know about me. Chandorkar asks Baba, “What mistake did I do that you are speaking to me like this”. Baba asks, “How did you reach Kopergaon and from Kopergaon here?” He said that he came in a horse cart. Baba said your co-brother told you that he wanted to take Darshan of Dutta but you did not allow him to take Dutta darshan and told him that first let us go and meet my Guru. . You made fun of his faith and that is why I made a thorn prick your feet. This time it was only a thorn but next time you commit such a crime, you may get a bigger punishment. This is Baba. Wherever one’s faith was he used to make it stronger. Today I will share with you one thing. One teaching of Baba,.. .., let the world live as they wish to, we can have no control over them, but if we believe our Baba to be our Sadguru, remember this always that when a person from other religion comes, when a person comes from some other sect, when some other Guru’s disciple comes you should deepen the faith in his Guru, there you must not praise Baba there, Baba will never be happy with that. This is the core teaching of Baba. In this world never before such an Avatar has manifested. Where their faith was, he made it stronger. And there is so much negative being said of such a Master. Just because he ate meat, he wanted to get the Muslims together so he was compelled to eat two pieces of meat, it is as though he has committed crime. . I will come to meat later as Kabirji says on meat Tilbhar Machali khay ke, Koti gau de daan. Kashi karvat lai mare, Toh bhi narak nidhan. So kabirji is clearly saying about non-vegetarian that even by eating sesame sized fish, even if you donate crores of cows, it is of no use. It is said that if anyone dies in Kashi then he gets liberation but Kabirji says the exact opposite. He says that even if you have sesame sized fish also I will come to non-vegetarianism and why he was compelled to eat meat later. But presently the controversy that is going on about whether Baba is Hindu or Muslim I am speaking on that so I will take that topic later. So, our Baba was such a great personality and people who always spoke on caste creed what Baba speaks about them I will take some verses on that also Adhyah 38 verse 92 Bhakt jayas Dev manati, Jayayachya je padarji lolati. Tayachi avlokiti kay jati, Parmartha Prapti dhik tyanchi. Devotees who believe him to be God, those who fall at the dust of his feet what to see the caste and religion of such a person. The one who sees caste and religion of such a great person, shame on such a person’s spirituality. . And he further says Ihamutri jo banala virakti, vivel vairagya jayachi sampati. Kay tayachi pahane jati, parmarth prapti dhik tyachi. that is the one who in this world and in the other, the person who has neither any desire in this world nor does he desire for liberation and salvation, the one who is beyond both the desires and whose wisdom and detachment is wealth, of such a person why to see the caste and religion. A person who sees caste and religion of such a person, shame on spirituality of such a person. He further says Dharmadharmatit sthiti, Jayachi shudh anandvrutti. Kay tayachi pahane jati, parmarth prapti dhik tyachi. the one who is beyond religion, the one whose spirit is pure happiness, why to see caste of such a person and those who see religion and caste of such a person, shame on his spirituality. But even then, there are some staunch people and there are such people in every religion do such things and for such staunch believers there is Adhyay 10 verse 50 Ram and Rahim ek. Yatkinchit he nahi pharak. there is not an iota of difference between the two. Mag bhaktich dharavi ka atak, vartave tutak kimarth. then why should the devotees look at the differences. then why behave in a wrong way. Same thing Kabir says,Ram Rahim ek hai, Naam dharaya doy, Kahe Kabir do naam suni, Bharam paro mati khoy. Because we heard two names there is confusion and we lost our mind whereas both are one. Now what has happened is that Muslim fundamentalist said Baba is Hindu and went away from him and the Hindu fundamentalist said that he is Muslim and they are distancing themselves from Baba. But they do not understand a small thing that we are putting hurdles in the path of Self evolution, we are creating obstacles in that. They do not understand this small thing. We cannot do anything about it. But if we are devotees of Baba then we should not make such a mistake. Whichever caste the person belongs to, whichever creed the person is, or he may be some other Guru’s disciple we must see that person with the same respect as we see Baba. In fact, if he has more knowledge about the other religions, he has more knowledge about other Gurus then taking that knowledge we must deepen their faith in their Guru and this is the most valuable wisdom from Baba. How much ever they have reproached, if you see Sai Satcharitra, in the entire scripture no where such harsh words are being used. Only in these three to four verses they have used the word ‘Damn’. It is clear that humans have come under the clutches of religion so very dangerously that the person does not want to remove the veil of religion. This veil has to be dropped and this the person does not know that is why Baba has so very sternly used the word ‘Damn’. If you see the entire Sai Satcharitra such a harsh word has not been used. So whatever arguments are there regarding Hindu and Muslim I believe that I have covered everything in this talk and as far as non-vegetarianism is concerned I have already said that I will give a complete talk on this. It is not possible to do so in this talk. If by Baba’s Grace the next session happens then there are many things like hymns, Sai Satcharitra leelas we will take them up. Let me clear one thing in this talk about meat, Baba has never encouraged anybody to eat meat. That is why there is Kabir’s Doha Tilbhar Machali khay ke. There is the notion amongst many of us that if Baba can eat then we can also eat. No, we cannot eat. We absolutely cannot eat. At least in Baba’s name we should not eat. You can say that we cannot drop eating meat so we eat it, that will do. But do not do this mistake of saying that Baba could eat so we can also eat. . If you are not able to drop eating it and you eat that will do but don’t eat meat saying that it is acceptable to Baba. See every time I bring up Kabir because in my eyes there is no difference between Kabirji and Baba. This is so because Kabir believed all religions are one and Baba also believed the same. . All his dohas cuts into all religion That is why he says Tilbhar Machali khay ke- how much is sesame, it is so tiny. After this even if you donate crores of cows and if you die in Kashi you will go to hell. . If he has said it with such severity about non-vegetarianism. What does Baba say? If you read Adhyay 38 carefully, he has never encouraged eating meat. He used to say that those who had desire he used to reluctantly feed them. If Baba fed them one morsel of meat, then thousands have dropped eating meat, this too you should remember. Baba’s intention is to take you away from eating meat and not feed meat. Today in this session three days satsang has happened, If I get at least five people who will leave eating meat I will be obliged. … I am indebted at your feet for lifetime. Sai Ram. I asked for five people but I saw ten people and this is Baba’s victory. To tell you the truth the advantages of leaving meat, you cannot even imagine. Baba has eaten in compulsion and not because he was fond of it. Baba’s tongue did not know the taste. So, believing that Baba used to eat so we will eat, Baba used to put his hand in the hot pot then we too shall have to do the same. Baba used to cut his body into pieces then we too have to cut and show. Baba used to remove his intestines and dry it on trees we also have to dry them on trees and show. Then you can eat meat. . I say again that if for some reason you are not able to leave eating meat then while eating at least have the realization it is against baba’s wishes. Some day you will stop eating. Since we are talking of non-vegetarianism let me tell you something. .In Adhyay 23 one yogi comes to Baba to take his advice but he sees Baba eating so he becomes uncertain in his mind and thinks that he had come to acquire knowledge of yoga thinking him to be a great yogi and this person is eating raw onion and in the scriptures it is forbidden to do so, it is said that all those who do sadhana should not eat raw onion. So, a person who is eating bread with raw onion how will he show me the path in yoga. He does not say this to Baba but his mind becomes uncertain. Shama is next to him so Baba says “Shama he who can digest the onion should only eat it”. Baba who can say this about onion how will he give permission to eat meat, think about this. So please do not eat meat in the name of Baba. We cannot leave meat; it is the vice of our mind some day help us drop it. It is okay to eat it with tears in the eyes eyes but do not eat it with relish, don’t eat it in the name of Baba, that will be a crime. This has given Baba a bad name. Many things that I have said may be against your wishes but I hope that you have taken everything with positive set of mind. and you would at least try to bring about the change. Today onward will you remember my words while eating meat? if yes,work is done then.",
    "Description": "#saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja \n#saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba #dashera #saibabapunyatithi #saibabavijaydashmi #saibabasamadhi #saigyan #saibabaprayer #saibabapreachings #saibabadialogue #saibabadivineteachings #दशहरा #साईबाबा #साईलीला #साईबाबासमाधी\n#shraddha #saboori #सच्ची श्रद्धा …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, सच्ची श्रद्धा, श्रद्धा, isckon, shreeleelaprabhupad, amog leela prabhu, constroversy, sai ram sai shyam",
    "Views": "60,619 views",
    "Likes": "1,568"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई ही राम साई ही कृष्ण Controversy 1",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WFCMyP4r_BI",
    "Transcript": "Baba lived what Lord Krishna told in Bhagwad Geeta so why ain't we call him Lord Krishna? I am going take a very important topic. Now a days Baba is presented in a very unappropriated way. Being a Sai devotee it's on me to clarify as per the intelligence given to me (By Baba) for my people. we don't have any right to answer those strayed people what they say about baba is impressions of their mind gained from the owner But yes, even our devotees are questioning whatever is said on social media. if a unknown or unfamiliar person Condemns Baba it might not matter But if someone from prestigious institutes says something about Baba without reading, without understanding Sai Satcharitra then it hurts. they are all great people but when you have not seen or read Sai Satcharitra or have not understood it and you say something on it. It is okay if you do not believe that Saibaba is God, that is your thought and we have no say in it. But for us he was, is and will be God. There are no two opinions on it. But today to our devotees through Sai Satcharitra will put forward certain things. Baba should not be linked to Ramji or Krishna, So, i present something related to the topic. Listen carefully. We do not want to give any knowledge to them, they are great people, good people doing good work. Is just that they have not read sai satcharitra so it is my request that if you read from your heart with pure feelings then all your confusion will go away. We can only request you, if you want you read, if you don't want to read then don't read. But I would like to place certain things before our devotees regarding this controversy. Please listen to every word carefully. Comparison of Saibaba with Ram and Krishna is not right is what they say. But for us everything is Baba be it Ram, Krishna, Shiva. We see and will always see all the Gods and Goddesses of this world in his Feet. Every Adhyaya in Sai Satcharitra begins with salutations with these five words. Every Adhyaya begins with Shree Ganeshaya namah. Shri Saraswataye namah, Shri Gurubhyoha namah, Shree Kuldevataya namah, Shree Sitaramchandrabhya namah, Shri Sadguru Sainathaya namah. So Baba has in every adhaya in salutation itself has said Shree Sitaramchandrabhya namah. Why has Baba done this? Because the character of Ram and Sita are ideals for every human being. I will say that if the Master of Brahmand created this Brahmand but if He did not give Ramayan in our hands then this creation would not have been anything other than dust. If the Brahmand has any value, if it has any worth then it is beacuse of character of ram and sita If there had been no sacred scripture like Ramayan then this Brahmand would not have any value., it would have been worthless. We would have lived like an animal and died like an animal. We would not have known that there is something called ideal. That is why Baba has in every adhyaya included Shree Sitaramchandrabhya namah. If we see the entire Ramayan carefully then Ram's character, Ram's perfectness, Ram's renunciation, Ram's sacrifice, obeying father's order, fulfilling mother's wish, it's not about just one thing. First I would like to speak about Ramji and then about Baba. To understand Ramji then if you see the entire Ramayan then the soul of it is in an episode, you download that episode. Whenever you get time then just see that episode and believe that it is the whole Ramayan. That episode is about a night where everything changes. Next day is Ramji's Rajya Abhishek, crowning ceremony. In the night Kaikai's mind gets corrupted and she asks two promises from Dasharath Maharaj one is her son's Bharat's crowning ceremony and Second is Ram's 14 years of exile. Kaikai is telling this to Ram and how Ramji reacts to this, is the scene. I believe that the entire Ramayan is in that scene. If you see it carefully then the entire Ramayan is included in that scene. At night he has been told that tomorrow morning is his crowning ceremony and the mother sits doing one lac Vishnu japa for her son. She says that tomorrow her son will rule he will sit on the throne and in the morning Kaikai changes the entire scene. And when Ramji comes to know about the two promises that the mother has asked he does not even have a frown on his face. now see he has prepared the whole night for the crowning ceremony and on getting up in the morning he comes to know that he has been exiled for 14 years. In one night his whole world has turned around but he is not disturbed. In fact his face has the same smile, luminous smile, a happiness and he says that I am blessed from four sides even in such adverse circumstances. He says obeying father's order is my first blessing, fulfilling my mother's wish is my second blessing, my third blessing is my younger brother like Bharat will get kingdom and will be crowned king, my fourth blessing is that if I wander in forest I will meet sanyasis, saints and such great ascetics and will have their darshan and so I am blessed from four sides. This is Ramji. We read Ramayan, see them on television' we recite holy scriptures like Ramayan but in reality if you look ramayana carefully then among all divine qualities of rama not even single quality is within us don't you believe this, although he was a human but was treated as god as all godly qualities were within him He was maryada purshottam but we made him God and he has every right to be a God To say is that the divine qualities owned by Rama of those not one is within us But in contrast is Ravana and all the demerits in him are present in us in more or less quantity who is Ravana? we are. one who will eradicate ravana from mind, ram is in one's mind. Spent whole life reading ramayana, reading ramacharitra manas but failed to recognize, \"i m ravana\". not a single divine quality of rama abodes in me but all the demerits of ravana adheres in me if the truth, i m ravana doesn't touch my heart then reading ramayana is futile Rama is called as purshottam, perfect among men. He never claimed to be a God but his character is so divine so chaste that we compel to call him a God A God will never call himself a God nor a Saint does but world revere them as a godly being. similarly, Baba never said that he was GOD instead used to say,\"i am a servant to God\" yes if he wants to increase the fidelity of any ardent devotee then he used to say,\"Even if you chant sai you will be salvaged.\" but if faith is present in him. because of living such a chaste life filled with renunciation today whole world call him God as rama was a perfect among men but due to his divine character he is God for us. his every sentence, every quality can be done by God not by human has become our perception always its been a matter of debate whether ramayana was real or its just an imagination Trapped in such petty thoughts, we spent our lives what is in trade of whether he lived or not? I do believe that he came in the form of a body. but then what ? most importantly, what's the point of his presence unless my conduct is like him? Whether he came or not could be disputed, but the conduct he followed or the sacred conduct he imitated, If you can live as pure as he lived, then Ram has incarnated inside you. It was very important to speak about Ram ji. Today, Baba should not be compared with Ram and Krishna is being promoted very vigorously. Through Sai Satcharitra, I will keep some things in front of you, rest, you all decide who he was. Reading Ramayana is of no value if it doesn't helps you to acquaint the ravana within you similarly reading sai satcharitra is vain if it doesn't show you your demerits verse no 44 from chapter 15 which says that it can't be a soap if it is unable to clean the dirt, in the same way how can it be said as reading or listening sacred text if it is not quenching one's ignorance one should not ponder over unnecessary things like, was he God or not? or whether Ramayana was real or not. saint kabir says in one of his couplets,\"A gentleman is the onewho will keep the meaningful and blows the fruitless away same as the wind winnows the chaff off the grain Therefore unnecessary and worthless talks should be blown away as a dust and never fall into such mindless controversies And to tell the truth, our religion is such a great religion that we see God even in rock. This is the land where not only humans but also stones are worshipped Lets come to Baba that why Sai devotees call him Rama and Krishna baba's life long pledge according to which he acted was to firm one's devotion where one's faith lies if a shiv bhakt came then his/her devotion in shiva was firmed, if ram bhakt came then his/her devotion in ram was strengthen by giving darshan as rama. there are many such examples And when a devotee of Krishna came, he appeared to him in the form of Krishna. he never showed that bad desire to convert the devotee devoted to other God or deity into his worshiper. and this is among the core teachings of baba On the contrary, one's devotion was grounded where one's believe was. Today, inappropriate things are being said for such a great entity. As a Muslim person comes, he fulfills his faith in his religion. When a disciple of a Guru comes, his faith in his guru was increased infinitely. One Ram was Dashrath’s son, one Ram is present within each human being One Ram is creator of everything, one Ram is beyond everything. This couplet fits perfect for Baba because baba is present in every bit of this creation and baba is the creator of everything baba also is beyond everything. so all the qualities of rama which sant kabir describes is present in baba. Therefore, baba for us is rama. now, why we call baba as krishna there is famous shlok of krishna from bhagwad geeta chapter 2 shlok no.23 nainaṃ chindanti śastrāṇi nainaṃ dahati pāvakaḥ na cainaṃ kledayantyāpo na śoṣayati mārutaḥ now what is its implicit meaning? krishna says describing himself,\"No weapon can cut me into pieces, I am that soul which can't be burned by fire nor moistened by water, nor withered by the wind.\" Now see what Krishna had said, Baba has lived it in his lifetime How? Proof for nainaṃ chindanti śastrāṇi - chapter 7* (sai satcharitra) he would practice Khandayoga separating hands, legs from the trunk at night many devotees used to terrify looking at the scene thinking someone has killed baba but in the morning they could see baba in whole and in one piece so the first vow of krishna nainaṃ chindanti śastrāṇi, baba lived it then why shouldn't we call baba as krishna second nainaṃ dahati pāvakaḥ - chapter 38 when baba used to cook food for his devotees he used to put his hand into cooking utensil as a spoon to stir the food yet his hands remained unburnt Now third vow of krishna na cainaṃ kledayantyāpo - chapter no 28 megha an ardent devotee of shiva wanted to bathe baba with Ganges water on the occasion of sankrant as he considered baba as shiva for his desire baba replied,\"I am a fakir what is the need of Ganges water? but devotional megha does not agree and wishes his shiva should completely bathed hence fetches water from godavari river 8 miles away. and baba instructs him to just spray some splash of water it will be enough so carried away by emotion megha pours all the water onto baba but as baba said only the head was wet leaving the body baba lived what krishna said that water cannot damp him. now 4th na śoṣayati mārutaḥ - chapter 44 baba for three days remains unconscious where baba's veins, breath and heart beats are completely stopped Lying absolutely like a dead body. the villagers here are compelled to say that bury him as soon as possible because the body can be reason for spreading of diseases but still after accepting the death baba's body was not decomposed thereby living the fourth vow of krishna Baba lived what Lord Krishna told in Bhagwad Geeta so why ain't we call him Lord Krishna? bhagwad geeta chapter 10 verse 20 - aham atma gudakesha sarva-bhutashaya-sthitah aham adish cha madhyam cha bhutanam anta eva cha O Arjun, I am seated in the heart of all living and nonliving entities. I am the beginning, middle, and end of all beings. and baba has given that experience of soul to many devotees then why shouldn't call him krishna? in chapter 28 there comes a verse explaining baba's omnipresence \"No door is necessary for my entry. I have neither shape nor size. I am always everywhere.\" chapter 9 verse 129 baba says,\"sometimes i am dog and sometimes a pig; sometimes i am a cow, sometimes a cat, and sometimes ant, a fly, an aquatic creature - in such various forms do i move about in this world.\" and further in 130th verse he says,\" know, that i like only him who sees me in all the living beings. So give up the sense of differentiation. This is the way to worship.\" then why not consider him as a God? why not consider him as ram or krishna? why not say sairam saisham? look its very easy to recite verses of bhagwad geeta for hours after studying it but very difficult to live the verses and also never underestimate baba as a small lamp; if you try to extinguish it then it will take a form of sun because there is truth. yes if there is truth in your then might nature will forgive you but if there is not then even nature will be stringent therefore before quoting about any saint one should think millions of times baba is that radiating sun of knowledge which cannot be eclipsed by your tiny hands having a small spoon hands you are trying to fill it with ocean of sai, not possible bring bigger vessel bring bigger heart then it is possible to imbibe the entire saisagar",
    "Description": "#saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja \n#saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba #dashera #saibabapunyatithi #saibabavijaydashmi #saibabasamadhi #saigyan #saibabaprayer #saibabapreachings #saibabadialogue #saibabadivineteachings #दशहरा #साईबाबा #साईलीला #साईबाबासमाधी\n#shraddha #saboori #सच्ची श्रद्धा …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, सच्ची श्रद्धा, श्रद्धा, isckon, shreeleelaprabhupad, amog leela prabhu, constroversy, sai ram sai shyam",
    "Views": "17,849 views",
    "Likes": "898"
  },
  {
    "Title": "True faith and false faith",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PZCPKpqIkLE&pp=0gcJCSMKAYcqIYzv",
    "Transcript": "Let's take an example of a doctor who easily accomplishes any intricate operation but trembles operating his daughter, reason is attachment. however detached they won't tremble. Sradha and Saburi is inscribed in every temple of Baba but what is true sradha (faith) ? and which is fake shraddha (faith) ? Let's have a discussion on this . Faith which remains steady irrespective of trials and tribulations is true faith. Lamp radiating in storms is lamp indeed. In the same way our faith should remain unperturbed come what may To understand we will take an aid of two contradictory leeLas relevant to Nanasaheb from chapter 33 As in first, while nanasaheb was going somewhere with his wife he gets a message about his friend's daughter who was suffering from fever caused by eruption of tumors he requested chandorkar to send some udi for the wellness of daughter. chandorkar had no udi at hand for the time so he picked up some dust on the way prayed to baba in supplication and applied the dust to his wife's forehead This results into well-being of girl, who as staying in another village, from fever Look at the faith of ChandorKar how superior it Was but second story of nanasaheb continuing from the same chapter mentions his daughter about to deliver any moment facing unbearable labor pains here the same nana had organized 'Navchandi Havan' and recitation of 'saptashati path' to overcome the difficulty So in the 1st story a girl from another village is cured by smearing the dust with faith to the forehead of his wife but in 2nd story for his daughter nana is helpless at the end baba needs to send Udi by the hands Ramgir Buva to nana's abode so what happened to the faith of nanasaheb for his daughter? what's the difference? when we shed our ego away even the dust then becomes Udi, as there is no attachment, no ego At the time of his daughter Nanasaheb fell into the clutch of attachment and illusion (Moha and maya) Let's take an example of a doctor who easily accomplishes any intricate operation but trembles operating his daughter, reason is attachment. without attachment hands won't tremble Same is the case in the story , attachment shakens the faith but faith without attachment converts roadside dust into Udi and iF mind is entrapped by attachments rituals become vain. story shows the charisma of detachment and renunciation We tend to be faithful as baba imparts his blessings on to us but if he retreat his arm over us then we would fall like a dry leaf. Initially, Baba provides faith Which we misinterpret being ours it's a credit not a gain hence it fades away. But for the conversion of faith is achieved by passing through storms For clarity I would take some verses of chapter 29 Treading on the path suggested by Him, everything seems pleasurable to begin with But later, that path will be so overspread with thorny shrubs, that there will be only thorns all sides . This is bitter but reality of life Faith then begins to waver, the mind is easily swayed by doubts and starts wondering why Sai brings it to this by-path And it is when you feel thus, that your faith should remain steadfast. These difficulties are the real test and that is how an unshakable faith is firmly planted. This is the difference between real and fake faith (shraddha) It is very easy to Keep the lamp lit in closed room but difficult in storms In the same way, its easy keep faith on Baba in good times but when gloom and anguish looms over life and still the tower of faith stands strong then it is the faith and patience baba meant I would like to end this talk with a Sher by Jigar Muradabadi this love (means devotion here) is not easy do understand its a river of molten magma to cross it, drown!",
    "Description": "📖 Shri Sai Satcharitra | Chapter 33 | The Real Meaning of Shraddha – Two Contrasting Leelas of Nanasaheb Chandorkar\nA unique story where two very different events happen in the life of the same person, and both bring the same message from Baba:\n\n“Shraddha is not when everything goes well, real Shraddha is when the storm comes.”\n\nCan even a learned and devoted person like Nanasaheb get caught in illusion and attachment?\n\nIs Baba’s Leela limited to miracles only, or is it also a test of the devotion within us?\n\nIs Sai’s path only a path of simple worship, or is it a test of our patience, faith and devotion every moment?\n\nIn this chapter Baba calms Nanasaheb’s anxiety, and also exposes the weakness of his Shraddha.\n\nIs Baba trying to say that Shraddha is not something to be written on the wall of a temple, but a test to be observed in the most difficult times of life?\n\nThis video asks you a question:\n\nWhen difficulties and sorrows come in life, do we remain steadfast on Baba's path, or do we break down?\n\nIs our faith a companion only in good times, or does it remain steady like a burning lamp even in every adversity?\n\n🌼 Faith and patience - these are the two pillars on which the Sai path rests.\n\nBaba repeatedly says:\n\n\"I am there, but first strengthen your faith.\"\n\nThis video is for all those who do not just want to see Baba's Leelas, but want to understand the spiritual teachings hidden behind them.\n\nThis is not just a story, but a test of your life.\n\n🙏 Watch, understand and feel -\nIs your faith also steadfast like a burning lamp in that storm?\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiCharitra #Shraddha #FaithAndPatience #SpiritualJourney #SaiTeachings #InnerStrength\n\n\n📖 Shri Sai Satcharitra | Chapter 33 | The True Meaning of Faith — The Two Contrasting Leelas of Nana Saheb Chandorkar\nA unique story where two completely opposite events happen in the life of one person, yet Baba’s message from both is the same:\n\"Faith is not when everything is going well; true faith stands firm during the storms.\"\n\nCan even a wise and devoted soul like Nana Saheb fall into confusion and attachment?\nIs Baba’s leela (divine play) just about miracles, or is it a test of the depth of our devotion?\nIs the Sai path simply a way of easy worship, or is it a constant test of our patience, faith, and surrender?\n\nIn this chapter, Baba calms Nana Saheb's distress but also exposes the weakness in his faith.\nIs Baba telling us that faith is not something to be written on temple walls, but a test to be upheld during life’s hardest moments?\n\nThis video asks:\nWhen pain and sorrow enter our lives, do we remain steady on Baba’s path, or do we falter?\nIs our faith only a companion in good times, or does it burn like a lamp that stays lit even in the fiercest storms?\n\n🌼 Faith and patience — the two pillars on which the Sai path rests.\nBaba repeatedly says:\n“I am here, but first strengthen your faith.”\n\nThis video is for everyone who wishes to go beyond just witnessing Baba's miracles and understand the spiritual teachings behind them.\nIt's not just a story — it's a test of your own life.\n\n🙏 Watch, understand, and feel —\nIs your faith unwavering like a lamp burning bright amid the storm?\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiCharitra #Faith #Shraddha #Patience #SpiritualJourney #SaiTeachings #InnerStrength …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, sai, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, सच्ची श्रद्धा, श्रद्धा",
    "Views": "20,546 views",
    "Likes": "876"
  },
  {
    "Title": "\" SAI \" नाम का अर्थ",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xVXf8HNy1Cc",
    "Transcript": "Name 'Sai' goes with the attire and the appearance of Baba In reality Baba summoned his name from the speech of mahalsapati we know everything about Sai Baba but what is the meaning of the name 'Sai' Normally, it is said as Saa means sakshat and iee means ishwar (real god) and it is indisputable But name Sai goes with the attire and the appearance Baba. In reality Baba summoned his name from the speech of mahalsapati we think that it was mahalsapati intuition to call Baba as Sai No Baba was the one who uttered the word 'Sai' from the mouth of mahalsapati Because he wanted the name that would suit his life work therefore he himself triggered the speech of mahalsapati to greet 'Come Sai'. and it is worldly renowned. But what is the meaning of it? Sai is a Sufi name. Sufism is a part of Islam. with this do not draw the conclusion that Baba was Muslim. I would like to give clearance for why Baba bore this name ? Sufism is a Sect belonging to Islam and as considering Sufism is amalgamated with Hinduism Today Islam has shunned it. In their view even Sufism is considered as offenders as they do not follow Allah wholeheartedly and as they have inclination to sing and dance in devotion so Sai is a Sufi name what is Sufism? Before i would like to clear what all people belongs to this sect Gurunanak, Mansoor, Kabir and Sai Baba. The main characteristic of Sufism was that they would look at all religions with same point of view It never meant any discrimination among religions . It shows a attitude of Goodwill and respect towards every religion. From it Sai name is evolved? The specialty of the Sufi sect is, from whichever religion may if it serves wisdom take it and shun the rest, do not look at its flaws Clad the righteous thoughts be it from any religion. This is Sufism. Hence Sufism is like a swan as it is Said that Swan Could drink only milk adulterated with water. Keeping this quality of Swan into mind Sufism imbibes righteous notions of all religions of world and dissuades unwanted thoughts with love But will keep respect for all religions and will embrace them all 99% is like taking and 1% is like giving up then why should we leave 99% for that 1%. This is the notion of Sufism And Baba have also tried to convey the same message to this world Therefore, it was not mahalsapati rather whole universe conspired to name the majesty through him. Today the name Sai' is eternal in whole universe. This Sunfistic teachings of baba should be smeared on to the minds of ours . There should not be an iota of bitterness for other religions in one minds. People think that Sufism is a part of islam but it reality it is born out of adwait philosophy , Vedic knowledge. Because vedas are millions of years ancient to Sufism and as our vedas say, \"the whole universe is my family'. This was announced by vedas millions of years before which was then accepted by Sufism so this thought of philosophy was emerged from vedic wisdom Vasudev Kutumbokum There is no discrimination for religion as all are one family when one resides the meaning of sai name into one's heart, the religions of the world clung to one's arm. only one has to meditate with its deepthness Therefore, Baba used to say plummet the wall of religion. so that we become one . Do remember on path of spirituality religion is a big obstruction until that diversifying wall of religion is plunged down neither your Khuda or God nor Bhagwant will be achieved Make your heart so immaculate that it embraces right and shuns the flaws of other religion without any complain, malice or jealousy. if this thing enters one heart then we truly understand Baba. or else discrimination abodes one heart then we can't be a devotee of Baba. what do we have to do with other religions? we just mean the teaching given by our Baba.",
    "Description": "…",
    "Tags": "sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, सच्ची श्रद्धा, श्रद्धा",
    "Views": "52,061 views",
    "Likes": "1,570"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Who is the true Guru? And who is the true disciple? Gurupoornima Satsang - 1... 2023",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F13dUboVrqY",
    "Transcript": "हम सब साईं सत चरित्र पढ़ते हैं और हम सब जानते हैं जीवन में गुरु की महत्ता का वर्णन श्री साईं सत चरित्र के दूसरे अध्याय में ही हमें मिल जाता है। जहां श्री काका साहेब दीक्षित ने एक प्रश्न पूछा बाबा से बाबा कहां जाए? बाबा ने सिर्फ कहा ऊपर जाना है। ऊपर जाओ। मार्ग कैसा है? बाबा ने कहा बहुत कठिन है। जंगल है। शेर भेड़िए रास्ते में गुम होने के भी संभावना है। रास्ते में गड्ढे होंगे। गिरने की संभावना है। फिर काका साहेब दीक्षित ने कहा फिर अगर कोई मार्ग प्रदर्शक हो तो हां अगर मार्ग प्रदर्शक हो तो इन सभी हालात में हमारी रक्षा करेगा। हमें सही रास्ते पर चलाएगा। जो उन रास्तों पर चल चुका है। ऐसा मार्ग प्रदर्शक हमें निर्दिष्ट स्थान पर पहुंचा सकता है। यह सारी बातें सुनकर श्री दाभोलकर जी समझ गए कि बाबा यह तो मेरी शंका का समाधान कर रहे हैं। जो यह मानते थे कि कर्म ही सबसे सही मार्ग है। कर्म योगी जो कर्म करेगा वो उसके बदले सुख दुख जो भी आएगा उसके जीवन में उसको वह तो भुगतना ही है। फिर गुरु की क्या आवश्यकता है? सदगुरु क्यों चाहिए जीवन में? उसी शंका का समाधान बाबा ने स्वयं कर दिया। जी हां, हम सब जानते हैं गुरु पूर्णिमा का पावन अवसर है। हमारे श्री साईं बाबा साईंनाथ महाराज हमारे सतगुरु के बारे में हम ज्यादा से ज्यादा बातें करें। उनके बारे में और गहराई में चाह के उनके बारे में जाने। इसलिए ही तो इस विशेष कार्यक्रम में हम आपसे ऐसे बहुत सारे गुणी जनों से बात करवाएंगे जो आपको श्री सतगुरु साईनाथ महाराज साईं बाबा के बारे में उनकी जीवनी के बारे में आपसे कुछ बातें साझा करेंगे। जय श्री साईं मैं वीणा दिखे श्री गुरु पूर्णिमा उत्सव के इस विशेष कार्यक्रम में आपका दर्शकों का तहे दिल से स्वागत करती हूं। आज इस विशेष कार्यक्रम में आज के हमारे मेहमान हैं श्री कृष्णा जी। जय श्री साईं कृष्णा जी। ओम साईं साईं लीला टीवी की ओर से हमारे सभी दर्शकों की ओर से मैं आपका स्वागत करती हूं। मैं दर्शकों से आपको मिलवाना चाहती हूं। उनका परिचय देना चाहती हूं। आप साईं भक्त तो हैं ही। इसके साथ-साथ यह व्यवसाय से अध्यापक हैं। मुंबई में रहते हैं। मुंबई में ही पहले बड़े हुए और बचपन से ही साईं भक्त हैं। हां। और इनकी विशेषता मैं आपको बताना चाहती हूं। श्री साईं सत चरित्र हम पढ़ते हैं। कितनी बार पढ़ चुके हैं। उसमें जो साईं लीलाएं हैं साईं की जो सीख है, साईं बाबा की जो शिक्षाएं हैं उन लीलाओं के पीछे जो गुढ़ अर्थ है, वो शायद हर पढ़ने वाला नहीं समझ सकता है। कृष्णा जी की यह खासियत रही है, यह विशेषता रही है कि उन्हें अनेक बार साईं बाबा की आशीर्वाद की अनुभूति होने के बाद उन्होंने उन लीलाओं का अध्ययन किया और उन लीलाओं के पीछे छुपा जो गढ़ अर्थ है वो सरल शब्दों में सारे भाविक भक्तों तक उन्होंने हाथ में सौंप दिया। वह पहुंचाते हैं। तो चलिए ऐसी कुछ बातें हम इनसे साझा करते हैं। मैं फिर से एक बार आपका स्वागत करती हूं और सबसे पहले तो मैं यह जानना चाहती हूं हमारे दर्शकों की ओर से जैसे कोई परंपरा चलती है तो हम सभी उस परंपरा का पालन करने लगते हैं। बिना कुछ बातें जाने उसका महत्व जाने उसकी महत्ता जाने। ऐसे ही कुछ बातें श्री गुरु पूर्णिमा उत्सव के बारे में तो जरूर होंगी। जैसे शिरडी में गुरु पूर्णिमा उत्सव जो शुरू हुआ उससे भी पहले गुरु पूर्णिमा उत्सव तो चलता आ रहा है। गुरु का पूजन तो चलता आ रहा है। गुरु के प्रति कृतज्ञता व्यक्त करना। तो इस बात का इस उत्सव का इस दिन का क्या महत्व है? यह आप हमारे दर्शकों से साझा करेंगे। ओम साईं राम। सभी साईं भक्तों के चरणों में कोटि-कोटि वंदन और गुरु पूर्णिमा उत्सव का कोटि-कोटि अभिनंदन। यह पूनम आपके जीवन में आपके जीवन का अमावस को हमेशा के लिए मिटाए और रोशनी की तरफ तुम्हें ले जाए। वह पूनम की भावना से यह गुरु पूर्णिमा का मैं फिर एक बार आप सबको हार्दिक हार्दिक अभिनंदन देता हूं इस गुरु पूर्णिमा के उत्सव पर जैसे कि वेद कहता है कि तमसो मा ज्योतिर्गमया तमसो मा ज्योतिर्गमया हम सब तमस से भरे पड़े हैं अज्ञान से भरे पड़े हैं और हमें रोशनी की तरफ जाना है। सबसे पहले गुरु पूर्णिमा किसके लिए है? सवाल यह है गुरु की बात हम बाद में करेंगे। लेकिन सबसे पहले गुरु पूर्णिमा उत्सव शिष्य के तरफ से मनाया जाता है। अपनी भावना अपना समर्पण अपनी सद्भावना गुरु के प्रति जो आस्था है उसको व्यक्त करने का यह महानतम दिनों में से एक है। लेकिन अब सवाल यह है कि शिष्य के तरफ से जो है वह यह गुरु पूर्णिमा शिष्य के लिए इतना महत्वपूर्ण क्यों है? और सबसे पहले क्या हम शिष्य हैं? यह सबसे पहले सवाल उठता है। क्या हम शिष्य हैं? क्योंकि शिष्य वो है जो सीखना चाहता है। हम शिष्य की अगर डेफिनेशन पूछा जाए तो जो सीखना चाहता है जिसको यह बात का एहसास हो कि मैं बहुत अदना सा व्यक्ति हूं। मुझ में दुनिया भर के ऐब है। दुनिया भर की कमतरताएं हैं। मुझे बदलना है। मैं बदलना चाहता हूं। मैं सीखना चाहता हूं। और यह प्यास जिसकी जगी है जो अपने अज्ञान से परेशान है जो अपनी तमस से परेशान है जो अपनी गंदी वासनाओं से परेशान है जो अपनी गंदी आदतों से परेशान है हकीकत में उसके दिल में जिस दिन यह तड़प जग जाती है और उसका मन जिस दिन वह रोशनी के लिए तलाश में निकलती है जिस दिन वो तमस से बाहर निकलना चाहता है और वाकई में ऐसे किसी गुरु की खोज में निकल पड़ता है जो उसकी यह सारी गंदगी से निजात दिला सके। उसके अंदर के तमस को मिटा सके। जिस दिन वो प्यास हम पूरा लेकर के कोई बंदा जब निकल पड़ता है तो वो व्यक्ति को गुरु को खोजना नहीं पड़ता। वो व्यक्ति के जीवन में गुरु स्वयं आ जाता है। तो यह बुनियादी फर्क है। हम हम यह बुनियादी फर्क है। साधारणता होता क्या है कि लोग गुरु पूर्णिमा के अवसर पर किसी चंद लोगों की बातें सुनकर के कि फलाना व्यक्ति बहुत ही ऊंचा दर्जे का है। मैंने उनसे दीक्षा ली है। तो आप भी उनकी उनके पास आकर के दीक्षा लीजिए और इस तरह से एक बाजार सजता है गुरु और शिष्य के बीच नॉर्मली होता ये है कोई स्वयं अनुभूति उसमें होती नहीं होती नहीं है अनुभूति का मतलब मैं फिर कहूंगा कि जहां मेरे मन में ये प्यास जग गई कि मुझ में दुनिया भर की कमतरताएं हैं। अच्छा मैं अज्ञान से भरा पड़ा हूं और मुझे हर कीमत पे इससे बाहर निकलनी है। ये तड़प अगर जग गई हम ये तड़प अगर जग गई तो वाकई में उस दिन वो व्यक्ति गुरु के चरणों में शरणागत होने की उसकी भावना वास्तव में पक्की हो चुकी है और उसकी खोज गुरु की वो सच्ची है और अगर यह प्यास नहीं है, अपने कमतरताओं का एहसास नहीं है, अपनी अज्ञानता का एहसास नहीं है। इसीलिए बाबा साईं सतचरित्र में दो अध्याय खर्च करते हैं। सिर्फ यह बताने के लिए कि हम कितने अज्ञानी हैं। और बाबा के जुबान से अगर हम समझना चाहे अध्यात्म क्या है? ब्रह्म ज्ञान क्या है? तो वो कहते हैं अज्ञान का नाश ही ज्ञान है। हम तो अज्ञान का नाश ही अगर ज्ञान है तो फिर अज्ञान पहले समझ में आना चाहिए ना। नाश किसका करना है वो तो समझना। और यह बात मानना होगा कि हां मैं अज्ञानी हूं। हम मुझ में दुनिया भर का तमस भरा पड़ा है और मुझे ऐसा किसी सद्गुरु की खोज है जो मेरी ये तमस को निकाल सकता है हम और जिस दिन वो प्यास किसी वो शारीरिक व्यक्ति हो सकता है हम वो या फिर जैसे आज बाबा समाधिस्थ है लेकिन सारी दुनिया के लिए सद्गुरु है वो दरबार हो सकता है जैसी उसकी अपनी भावना होगी हम वो वहां पे जाएगा वहां अपना सर नवाएगा और अपने आप को उनको सौंप देगा कि यहां से मुझे रोशनी मिलेगी। मेरा अज्ञान का अंधियारा यहां छट सकता है। यहां मिट सकता है। ये आस्था लेकर के जब किसी के दरबार में पहुंचता है वो बंदा तो वाकई में मेरी नजर में वो दिन वो प्यास लेकर के जब वो किसी के सच्चे दरबार में उसने जिस दिन भी कदम रखा वो गुरु पूर्णिमा और जहां तक मंत्र दीक्षा होती है। गुरु पूर्णिमा के दिन गुरु क्या करते हैं? मंत्र दीक्षा देते हैं। मैं दीक्षा के ऊपर भी मैं कुछ बोलना चाहूंगा। सारी दुनिया को ऐसा लगता है कि वो दिन हम जाकर के बैठे और गुरु ने हमारे कान में कोई मंत्र फूंका या फिर सार्वजनिक तौर पे हमको कोई एक मंत्र दे दिया और हम दीक्षित हो गए। सारी दुनिया की ये सोच है। अच्छा लेकिन मैं थोड़ा इससे इख्तलाफ करूंगा। मतलब मेरी भावना ये है कि उससे कुछ नहीं होता। अच्छा आप दुनिया को देख के इन्होंने उतने लोग अगर आज इनसे जुड़े हैं। हम इतने लोग अगर आज इनसे मंत्र दीक्षा लिए हैं तो क्या ऐसे ही लिए हैं? तो जरूर कोई बात होगी। तो चलो मैं भी वह जाकर कतार में खड़ा हो जाता हूं। मैं भी दीक्षा लेता हूं। अब यह भावना से लोग जाकर के दीक्षाएं लेती हैं। नॉर्मली नॉर्मली यह होता है। लेकिन यह कभी नहीं देखते हैं कि सबसे पहले गुरु की बात मैं बाद में बात करूंगा। पहले मुझ में क्या वो प्यास वाकई में जगी है? क्या मैं अपने अज्ञान से परेशान हो चुका हूं? क्या रात और दिन मुझे यह अज्ञान मेरा डसता है सर्प बन करके? क्या जब भी मेरे मन में एक गलत विचार उठता है तो क्या मेरे आंख से आंसू छलकते हैं? वाकई में जिस दिन ये सारी चीजें मेरे अंदर में होने लगी कि मैं ऐसा मानता हूं कि उसी पल मैं दीक्षित हो गया। मुझे किसी गुरु के सामने जाकर के दीक्षा लेने की भी जरूरत नहीं है। अच्छा। जिस पल भी मेरे अंदर में यह तड़प जग गया अपने अज्ञान को लेकर के अपनी वासनाओं को लेकर के अपने विकारों को लेकर के जिस दिन मैं तड़पने लगा और मैं जहां खड़ा हूं वहां पे अगर आसमान पे मेरी आंख उठती है और मेरी प्रार्थना निकलती है कि मालिक मेरे अंदर से ये गंदगी को मिटा दे या तो फिर मुझे ही मिटा दे। जिस दिन इतनी तड़प किसी व्यक्ति के अंदर जग गई कि वह तड़प मेरे नजर में दीक्षा लेना है। दिस इज द रियल मीनिंग ऑफ दीक्षा। हम हम शायद दुनिया इससे इत्तेफाक रखे नहीं रखे मैं नहीं जानता। लेकिन जो मेरा अनुभव है जीवन का मैं उसके दम पे तो इतना ही बोलूंगा। वो है वास्तव में दीक्षा वो है वास्तव में गुरु पूर्णिमा। हम हम क्योंकि अगर वह प्यास नहीं जगी है। आप खाली देखादेी कर रहे हैं। आप खाली रीति रिवाजों में फंसे हैं। जैसा देखिए अभी आज गुरु पूर्णिमा है। आज ये गुरु पूर्णिमा के अवसर पर हर मंदिर सस्ते हैं। हम हर पंडाल सस्ते हैं। बड़े-बड़े पैमाने पे अन्नदान होते हैं। बड़ी योगदान होता है। लाखों रुपए की खर्च की जाती है। मतलब वो उत्सव को मनाया जाता है। लेकिन एक पल के लिए हम लोग यह कभी नहीं सोचते हैं क्या बाबा यह चाहते हैं। हम ये तो हमारी भावना है। ठीक है। हमारी भावना तक भी ठीक है क्योंकि साल में एक बार आता है तो एक उत्सव को उत्सव की तरह ही मनाना चाहिए। वहां तक मैं उसको है ना उसका अगर फल मिलता है किसी इंसान को तो मैं कहूंगा ज्यादा से ज्यादा 4 टू 5% फल मिलता रहेगा जब ये उत्सव मनाते हैं आप। अच्छा लेकिन 95% जो मिलना चाहिए वो हम उससे नजारत रहते हैं। वो हमें नहीं मिलता। हम खाली हम चार से 5% फल पाते हैं ये उत्सव मना करके ये रीति रिवाज को अपना करके कि हर साल गुरु पूर्णम आता है। तो हमें ये निभानी चाहिए और हम आज ऐसा डेकोरेशन करेंगे। आज हम बाबा का ऐसा अलंकार करेंगे। आज हम मंदिर को ऐसा सजाएंगे। आज हम इतने करोड़ रुपए उढेलेंगे। नहीं सच में एक बार आप बाबा से पूछ के तो देखिए क्या उन्हें यह सब मंजूर है? आपको सीधा आंसर आएगा। बिल्कुल मंजूर नहीं। क्योंकि बाबा 1911 तक उन्होंने कभी एज ए गुरु किसी को भक्ति करने दी ही नहीं। जब भी कोई बंदा उनके पास जाता था कि बाबा हम आपको गुरु मानते हैं और हमें आपकी पूजा करनी है तो वो बोलते थे जाओ वो खंा पड़ा है सामने उसकी पूजा करो अच्छा क्या मकसद है इसके पीछे ऐसा क्यों करते थे बाबा आज है ना ये एक लीला है ना संसार के जितने भी गुरु है हम उनके लिए ये सीख है जो बाबा सारी दुनिया के गुरुओं को दे रहे हैं कि जो गुरु अपने आप को गुरु मानने लगा हम कि इतने लोग मेरे शिष्य हैं। इतने लोग मुझे गुरु मानते हैं और मैं इनका गुरु हूं। यह जज्बा भी अगर मेरे अंदर में जाग गया कि मैं गुरु से कट गया। क्योंकि एक सच्चा जो इंसान होता है, वह अपने आप को कभी किसी का गुरु मानता ही नहीं है। और बाबा ने भी कभी अपने आप को गुरु माना नहीं। हमने उनको गुरु बनाया उनके गुण देख के, उनका वैराग्य देख के, उनका ज्ञान देख के, उनकी करुणा देख के। हम वो अपने आप को कभी भी मैं गुरु हूं। ऐसा नहीं कहा। लेकिन हमने हमने उनको गुरु माना। हम यह हमारी भावना है उनको लेकर के क्योंकि इतनी दिव्य विभूति अगर हमारे सामने खड़े हैं जितने भी इनमें गुण है वो एक सच्चे सद्गुरु के गुण हैं। वो गुण हमने देखा और हमने उनको गुरु मान लिया। लेकिन वो अगर उनके नजरिए से आप अगर आप उनसे पूछो तो बोलेंगे नहीं वो तो यहां तक बोलते हैं हर भक्त को कि मैं यहां द्वारका माई में जो बैठा हूं और आप लोग जो मेरे दर्शन के लिए आते हैं तो मैं बड़ा भाग्यवान हूं कि मुझे आपके चरणों का दर्शन हो रहा है। एक सद्गुरु अपने भक्तों से कह रहे हैं। संसार का पहला सद्गुरु होगा जो यह बात किसी शिष्य से कह रहा होगा। लेकिन बात की गंभीरता को प्लीज समझिएगा। उनके मन में ख्वाब में भी यह भावना नहीं है कि मैं इनका गुरु हूं। मैं इनका स्वामी हूं। वो क्या कह रहे हैं? दासानुदास में तुमसा मैं तुम्हारे दासों का भी दास हूं। भक्तों से बोल रहे हैं। मैं तुम्हारा दासों का भी दास हूं। तुम्हारी यह कृपा है कि मुझे तुम्हारे चरण का दर्शन हो रहा है। यह गुरु शिष्य से कह रहे हैं और मैं ऐसा मानता हूं कि आज मैं अगर यह वचन को नहीं लेता हूं। अभी मैं गुरु की तरफ आ रहा हूं। मैं अगर ये वचन को नहीं लेता हूं तो फिर सच में गुरु पूर्णिमा अधूरी रह जाएगी। कि एक सच्ची सद्गुरु की भावना क्या होती है? अपने भक्तों को लेकर के। वो अपने भक्तों को अपने से नीचा मानते ही नहीं है। मैं इनका गुरु हूं। यह भावना ख्वाब में भी नहीं आता है। और जिस बंदे को यह लगता है कि इतने लोग मुझे फॉलो कर रहे हैं और इतने लोग मुझे गुरु कह रहे हैं, मैं गुरु बन गया कि उसी क्षण से वो व्यक्ति का पतन शुरू हो गया। उसी क्षण से इसलिए कबीर जी कहते हैं बहुत ही बेहतरीन दोहा है गुरु तो ऐसा चाहिए हम जो शिष्य से कछु ना ले हम गुरु तो ऐसा चाहिए जो शिष्य से कछु ना ले हम और शिष्य ऐसा चाहिए जो गुरु को सब कुछ दे। वाह वाह वाह क्या बात है। तो सच्चा गुरु वो जो भक्त से ना धन की कामना करता है ना मान सम्मान की कामना करता है। ना महिमा का बकान करे मेरा वर्णन करे ये भावना रखता है। महिमा मंडन चाहता है। उल्टा सच्चा सद्गुरु वो जो वक्त पड़े हम तो अपना सब कुछ वो भक्त पे न्योछावर कर दे। रात और दिन लगा दे वह भक्त के पीछे उस पर काम करे उसके अंदर की गंदगी उसकी तमस को मिटाए और एक दिन वो भक्त को अपना जैसा पूर्ण बना दे। यह तड़प लेकर के जो इस दुनिया में आया है केवल और केवल यह तड़प लेकर के कि हर बंदा जो मुझसे जुड़ा है वो सिर्फ उसमें समस्या यह है कि वो अज्ञान से भरा पड़ा है। अदरवाइज उसमें और मुझ में कोई अंतर नहीं है। हम वो भावना लेकर के वो इस दुनिया में आते हैं और वो हम जैसे पामरों को बड़े दिल से अपनाते हैं। हमारी दुनिया भर की गंदगी होने के बावजूद और वो हमारी तमस को मिटाते हैं और भावना यह होती है कि एक दिन जिस दिन इसका अंधियारा छट जाएगा जिस दिन इसका अज्ञान मिट जाएगा तो इसमें और मुझ में कोई अंतर नहीं होगा। इसीलिए वो खाली वो अज्ञान देखता है कि ये बंदा हकीकत में उतना ही पूर्ण है जितना मैं हूं। वाह हम उनको वो तुच्छ नहीं मानता। उनको हीन भावना से नहीं देखता। निचली निगाह से नहीं देखता अपने भक्तों को। वो उनको उतना ही पूर्ण मानता है जितना कि वो स्वयं है। और और बस उनके अंदर का वो अज्ञान को मिटाने के लिए। लेकिन दिन और रात काम करता है उनके ऊपर। दिन में जो अनुभव दे सकता है वह अनुभव देकर के उनका अज्ञान को धोता है। रात में ख्वाब में भी उनके ऊपर काम करता है। ऐसे कुछ ख्वाब देता है कि उनका अज्ञान दूर हो जाए। उनका प्रारब्ध धुल जाए। ऐसे कई लीलाएं हैं साईं सतचरित्र में। तो जो 24 घंटा एक भक्त के लिए तड़प रहा है। एक भक्त के लिए जैसे मानो अवतार ही भक्तों के लिए लिया है। उनका उनका स्वार्थ क्या है इस दुनिया में आने का? कुछ भी नहीं। वो तो एक टूटी फूटी मस्जिद में एक फकीर की भांति पूरी जिंदगी उन्होंने जिया हम कुछ भी अपेक्षाएं नहीं थी और जो व्यक्ति की कुछ भी अपेक्षा नहीं है हम वही व्यक्ति दुनिया को अपना सब कुछ दे सकता है जहां मान सम्मान की धन की या फिर सेवा की कामना भी अगर किसी गुरु में शिष्य को लेकर के है तो अभी वह गुरु नहीं वो तो गुरु का खाली सोंग है। मैं तो ऐसा ही कहूंगा। वो अभी गुरु बनने के लायक ही नहीं है। तो गुरु के तरफ से गुरु में इतने सारे क्वालिटीज होने चाहिए। और शिष्य वो जो अपना पूरा धन तन मन और वक्त पड़े तो जान भी न्योछावर कर दे। तो शिष्य अगर हो तो ऐसा और अगर गुरु हो तो वैसा। जब यह कॉम्बिनेशन दोनों जुड़ जाते हैं हम जब दो ऐसे व्यक्तियों का मिलाप हो जाता है हम तो फिर एक इतिहास रचा जाता है। हम इसीलिए कहते हैं गुरु अगर सर्वसमर्थ भी है हम गुरु अगर पूर्ण है गुरु अगर ब्रह्मांड का नायक भी है तब भी शिष्य में भी वो क्वालिटीज होनी चाहिए कि वो ब्रह्मांड के नायक के गुणों को अपने हृदय में धारण कर सके उनके हृदय की तड़प को समझ सके वो मुझसे क्या अपेक्षा कर रहे हैं वो मैं जान सकूं उसके अनुरूप अपने आप को मैं बदल सकूं और जिस दिन मैं अपने आप को उनके मन के हिसाब से उनके मर्जी के हिसाब से अपने आप को बदल पाया कि उस दिन मेरे जीवन में गुरु पूनम का उदय हुआ। क्या बात है तो सबसे बड़ी बात यह है कि गुरु की मर्जी क्या है? हम वो मुझसे क्या अपेक्षा करते हैं? हम नहीं तो कबीर जी एक बात बोलते हैं बंधे को हम खुद बंधा हुआ है। बंधे को बंधा मिला। हम अगर समझो एक बंधा हुआ है दूसरा उसको दूसरा बंधा हुआ कोई गुरु मिला बंधे को बंधा मिला छूटे कौन उपाय संगति कर निर्बंध की जो पल में ले छुड़ाए वाह वाह वाह वो बोलते हैं कि ऐसे गुरु की संगति करना जो बंधनों से आजाद है जो खुद मोह माया से आजाद है जो खुद विकारों से आजाद है खुद अहंकार से आजाद है मान सम्मान से आजाद है जो ऐसे सच्चे गुरु से अगर कहीं जाकर के तुम्हारी बंदगी बन जाती है। आपको अगर ऐसे गुरु की सोबत मिल जाती है। तभी जाकर के वो जो गुरु और शिष्य का जो रिलेशनशिप है वो इतिहास रचता है। जैसे कि अभी विवेकानंद और रामकृष्ण परमहंस अब वो जो आज भी इतिहास उनको जब भी देखती है हम तो उतनी ऊंची निगाह से देखती है कि गुरु अगर हो तो रामकृष्ण परमहंस जैसा और शिष्य अगर हो तो विवेकानंद जैसा कैसा है कि गुरु को ख्वाब में भी ये नहीं आना चाहिए कि ये मेरा शिष्य है। तो वो गुरु जैसे ही वो गुरु के मन में यह भावना जाग गई कि इतने लोग मुझे फॉलो करने लगे हैं। इतने लोग मुझे गुरु मान रहे हैं। अगर यह थॉट भी किसी के अभी समझो फॉर एग्जांपल मैं ही हूं। मैं किसी और की बात नहीं करूंगा। मैं अपनी ही बात करूंगा। आज मुझे बहुत लोग सुन रहे हैं। सद्भावना से सुन रहे हैं। बहुत ही सद्भावना से सुन रहे हैं। लेकिन बहुत लोग गुरु बोलते हैं। क्या? लेकिन मैं वाकई में गुरु हुआ उनका। अगर मेरे मन में पल भर के लिए भी वो खलिश आ गई कि मैं इनका गुरु हूं तो फिर बाबा का टीचिंग्स मेरे अंदर में अभी उतरा नहीं है। हम देखो उनकी भावना उनके जगह पे सही उनकी भावना अगर वो वो जितनी ऊंची भावना रखेंगे वो उतना ऊंचा फल पाएंगे। फल पाएंगे। यह उनका मुकद्दर है। हम उनका सद्भावना है। हम लेकिन अगर मेरे मन में यह भावना आ जाती है कि ये लोग मुझे गुरु मानते हैं। मैं इनका गुरु हो गया तो फिर मेरा पतन शुरू हो गया। हम और एक ना बहुत ही मैं अहम बात बोलना चाहूंगा। जी बिल्कुल। गुरु जब हम किसी गुरु को देखते हैं गुरु के बारे में जितनी गहराई से आपको नॉलेज मिलते जाती है और जितना आप गुरु को पूर्ण रूप से देख पाते हैं गुरु को अगर आप ब्रह्मांड का नायक मानते हैं। गुरु को अगर आप कण-कण के निवासी मानते हैं। गुरु को अगर आप अंतर्यामी मानते हैं तो जितना आपकी निष्ठा आपके गुरु के प्रति पूर्ण होगी आपका साधना जब परिपक्व होगा तो आपकी पूर्णता को उपलब्ध होने की संभावना उतनी ही बढ़ जाती है। हम हम लेकिन अगर गुरु की वह पूर्णता गुरु की वह करुणा गुरु की वह जितनी भी क्वालिटीज है अगर वह क्वालिटीज आपके हृदय तक नहीं पहुंचते हैं तो आप खाली गुरु गुरु कह रहे हैं लेकिन गुरु की हृदय की बात गुरु की आत्मा गुरु की जितनी भी मतलब महिमाएं हैं जितनी भी रहस्यमय बातें हैं उनका हृदय है उनकी आत्मा है अगर उनकी पूर्णता को अगर आप नहीं समझ पाते हैं अगर आप उसमें सक्षम नहीं होते हैं तो फिर आपका ज्ञान अधूरा होने की वजह से आपकी फल भी अधूरा ही होगा। और अगर आप गुरु को पूर्ण मानते हैं तो आप भी एक दिन पूर्ण हो जाएंगे। कबीर का वो दोहे के बगैर गुरु पूनम पूरा नहीं हो सकता। संत कबीर जी तो गुरु महिमा कहते थकते नहीं है। बिल्कुल। जैसे कि उनका सबसे फेमस दोहा है गुरु गोविंद दोनों खड़े काके काके लागो पाए बलिहारी गुरु आपने गोविंद दियो बताएं। तो कबीर जी क्या कहना चाहते हैं इसमें? कबीर जी कह रहे हैं कि मेरे एक गुरु है जो शरीरधारी मेरे सामने खड़े हैं। जिनके चरणों में मैं हमेशा से ही नतमस्तक हूं। हां और वो मेरे सामने खड़े हैं और उसी समय मैं जिनकी उपासना कर रहा हूं सालों से वो नारायण वो गोविंद साक्षात दर्शन देने के लिए मेरे सामने खड़े हो गए और अब ये दोनों एक साथ मेरे सामने खड़े हैं। अब मैं असमंजस में पड़ गया हूं कि पहले दर्शन किसका करूं? हम गुरु का या नारायण का। गोविंद का एक है जो लक्ष्य तक ले जाने में हम मुझे पल-पल सहायता दी। मेरे गुनाहों को माफ किया। मेरी गंदगी को धोया। पल-पल मुझ पर काम किया। उनकी करुणा इतनी है। उनका ऋण इतना बड़ा है कि मैं करोड़ जन्म लेकर के भी अगर उनकी सेवा करूं तो वो मैं चुका ना सकूंगा। एक वो है मेरे गुरु जो मुझे लक्ष्य तक ले जाने में मुझे पल-पल साथ दिया मेरा। हम और दूसरा साक्षात लक्ष्य है। हम लक्ष्य की प्राप्ति हो चुकी है। दोनों खड़े हैं मेरे सामने। फिर बोल रहे हैं कि मैं पहले किसके पैर पड़ूं? उनका ईमान देखिए। वो बोलते हैं बलिहारी गुरु आपने गोविंद दियो बताए। तो जो निर्गुण निराकार ये पूरा ब्रह्मांड का नायक गोविंद था उनकी गहराई को बताने वाले गुरु आप थे। आप हैं। उन तक पहुंचाने में पल-पल मेरी सहायता करने वाले आप हैं। हम तो मेरे लिए तो गोविंद से करोड़ गुना ज्यादा मेरे गुरु है। पहले मैं गुरु की ही पूजा करूंगा और बाद में और मैं गोविंद की तरफ देखूंगा और सच बोलूं मैं। सबसे पहले तो गुरु और गोविंद दोनों अलग-अलग नहीं है। वो एक ही तत्व है। चलो लेकिन एक पल के लिए मान लेते हैं कि वह दोनों अलग-अलग है। एक पल के लिए मान लेते हैं। लेकिन जब किसी बंदे की गुरु भक्ति ऐसी दिखेगी ना तो गोविंद वहां पे नृत्य करने लगेगा। हम क्योंकि इतनी चित्त की शुद्धि उनकी भी है। वह यही देखेगा कि वाह क्या ईमान है। कितनी क्लेरिटी है। अभी मैं आपको एक बात बोलता हूं। आज बाबा बाबा हमारे सामने प्रत्यक्ष नहीं है। हम ये सवाल मैं जानबूझ के उठा रहा हूं। हां हम सारी दुनिया मुझसे पूछती हैं। हम कि आज हम सद्गुरु मानते हैं बाबा को। हम तो क्या फिर भी किसी शरीरधारी गुरु का होना आवश्यक है? अच्छा यह सवाल पूछा जाता है। हम हम क्या किसी शरीरधारी गुरु का होना आवश्यक है? क्योंकि हम तो हमको तो मिले हैं बाबा सद्गुरु तो उस पे मेरा एक ही जवाब है। अगर बाबा से आपको रोशनी मिल रही है। अगर बाबा के हृदय को आप जैसा वे है वैसा अगर आप समझने की क्षमता है। उनके हृदय की तड़प को समझने की क्षमता है। उनकी हिदायत को समझने की क्षमता है। उनका एक-एक रहस्य को समझने की क्षमता है। अगर आपका रूह उनके रूह से अगर जुड़ चुकी है हम और वो रोशनी आपको हर दिन मिल रहा है तो आपको वाकई में किसी शरीरधारी गुरु की आवश्यकता नहीं है। हम हम लेकिन यदि वो पाने में वो रूह की रोशनी डायरेक्टली पाने में वो गहराई उनके हृदय की गहराई अगर डायरेक्टली पाने में अगर आप सक्षम नहीं है तो फिर आपको किसी शरीरधारी गुरु जो आपसे बेहतर है जो निर्बंध है जो निर्बंध है बिल्कुल वैसे किसी व्यक्ति का सानिध्य पाना होगा बगैर अहंकार को अपनाए हुए ऐसे किसी व्यक्ति के चरणों में अपने आप को न्योछावर करना ही होगा तो ही को त्याग कर हां तो ही वो सद्गुरु के शरण मिलेगी क्योंकि क्या है अगर आप सक्षम नहीं है गुरु के हृदय को जानने में तो आपकी कनेक्टिविटी बनी ही नहीं है आप खाली उनके शरीर के साथ जुड़े हैं ना उनके हृदय के साथ जुड़े हैं ना उनकी आत्मा के साथ जुड़े हैं ना उनके जीवन के रहस्यमय बातों से जुड़े हैं ना वो जो आपको आज्ञा देना चाहते हैं ना आप उसको समझ पा रहे हैं तो फिर खाली शारीरिक रूप से बाबा से जुड़ के आप अगर अपने आप को ऐसा मानते हैं कि हम उनके शिष्य हैं तो यह बिल्कुल लाजमी नहीं है। फिर एक गोरख धंधा है और यह एक अहंकार का प्रतीक है। हां और एक बात बोलूंगा। लेकिन किसी शरीरधारी गुरु को चुनते समय जल्दबाजी मत करना। साधारणत लोग बोलते हैं कि किसी गुरु की परीक्षा नहीं करनी चाहिए। लेकिन मैं उसके बिल्कुल खिलाफ हूं। मैं तो कहूंगा कि जितनी परीक्षा कर सको कर लेना। और जिस दिन आपके परीक्षा पे अगर वो खरा उतरता है लेकिन उस दिन वो बंदे के चरणों में ऐसे झुक जाना कि फिर वहां से तुम कभी ना निकलो। एक हो जाना। एक हो जाना। फिर उसके बाद है ना फिर संशय के लिए जगह नहीं बचती है। हां लेकिन शुरू मतलब है ना अपने आप को सौंपने से पहले करोड़ बार जांच लेना। सर आप कृष्णा जी जो बातें कह रहे हैं वो समझने के लिए उतनी गहराई भी होनी चाहिए। और अगर इस मनोवस्था में वो इंसान नहीं है तो मैं नहीं मानती कि किसी भी इंसान से गुरु रूप में वो जुड़ सकता है। अगर वो खुद में अगर उसमें भक्त होने के शिष्य तो बहुत दूर है। है ना? शिष्य होने के उसके पहले जो पायदान आता है वो सही सच्चे भक्त का वहां तक भी बहुत लोग पहुंच नहीं पाते हैं। हम लोग पहुंच नहीं पाते हैं क्योंकि सच्ची भक्ति क्या है? जैसे आप बता रहे हैं वो सही रास्ता है कि पहले खुद को जानो तुम भक्त हो या नहीं अगर सच्चे भक्त हो तो ही गुरु महिमा की जो रोशनी है वो आप तक पहुंचेगी जिसकी तरफ नहीं आ रही है मुझे नहीं लगता वो ब्लॉकेज और कोई हटा सकता है है ना ये तो ब्रह्मांड नायक जैसे आपने कहा तो ये सद्गुरु ही कर सकते हैं तो साईं बाबा के इस शिरडी में कण-कण में हम यह महसूस करते हैं। मुझे तो लगता है यह कि रोशनी लेकिन इसके लिए वो भक्त भी उतना सच्चा होना चाहिए। वही मुझे वही कहना है कि जो गहराई वो देना चाहते हैं दुनिया को क्या हम वो गहराई को हासिल कर पा रहे हैं? हम हम सवाल ये है अब देखिए 11वा अध्याय में साईं सचित्र में एक ओवी आती है पूजक जेतवर साकारू हम देहधारीच आवश्यक गुरु हम फिर से मैं रिपीट करता हूं पूजक जेतवर साकारू देहधारीच आवश्यक गुरु क्लियर कर दिया है बाबा ने अगर आप सगुण साकार में हैं आप अभी अपने आप को देह मान रहे हैं मन बुद्धि मान रहे हैं अभी आप देह बुद्धि के परे नहीं हो पाए हैं तो आपको एक शरीरधारी गुरु की ही आवश्यकता है। बाबा ने खत्म ही कर दिया है यह बात बोल के कि पूजक जेतवर साकारू देहधारी आवश्यक गुरु निराकारास निराकारू हां निर्धारु शास्त्रासा लेकिन अगर मैं खुद निराकार परबह्म की अवस्था पे पहुंच चुका हूं तो फिर मुझे निराकार जो गुरु है जो गुरु अभी शरीरधारी नहीं है जैसे फॉर एग्जांपल आज बाबा है आज निर्गुण निराकार में है लेकिन फिर मैं उनसे जुड़ पाऊंगा मैं उनसे वह फैज हासिल कर पाऊंगा। लेकिन अगर मैं खुद सगुण साकार में हूं, मैं खुद अपने आप को शरीर, देह, मन, बुद्धि, इंद्रिय मानता हूं। तो फिर मुझे वो अवस्था से बहुत ऊपर उठने के लिए मुझसे बेहतर जो एक शरीरधारी गुरु है, मुझे उसकी सहायता लेनी ही पड़ेगी। तो यह गुरु पूर्णिमा का मैं ऐसा मानता हूं कि बहुत इंपॉर्टेंट आस्पेक्ट है क्योंकि मुझसे कहीं कहीं कई लोग ये सवाल पूछते हैं। पता नहीं मुझे ऐसा लगा कि इस बार है ना मैं इसके ऊपर ज्यादा अच्छे से खुलासा ही कर दूं कि शरीरधारी गुरु की आवश्यकता उतनी ही है जितनी बाबा बता रहे हैं कि मैं एक शरीरधारी गुरु की खोज में था और उन्होंने हासिल किया उनको 32वां अध्याय उसका प्रमाण है। हां तो बाबा अगर चाहते थे तो बाबा भी बोल सकते थे ना कि मैं विट्ठल को मानता था और फिर मेरे को विट्ठल का दर्शन हो गया। मैंने साक्षात्कार कर लिया लेकिन उन्होंने वैसा नहीं किया। वो बोले कि हम ब्रह्म ज्ञान की खोज में निकले। मैं और मेरे तीन सहपाठी अभी वो कहानी भी उसके बगैर गुरु पूर्णिमा अधूरी है। हम तो वो तीन जन निकलते हैं। हर कोई वेदा अध्ययन किए हुए हैं। एक कहता है कि कर्म जिसका शुद्ध है बस वही भगवान को पाएगा। और दूसरा कहता है कि जिसके पास नित्यानित्य विवेक है वही वह मालिक का दर्शन पाएगा। साक्षात्कार होगा और तीसरा कहता है कि जो मन को अपने काबू में कर लेगा वही उसका साक्षात्कार कर लेगा। और बाबा इनमें से एक होते हैं और बोलते हैं कि ये किताबी बातें सारी बाजू में रखो। लेकिन मैं ऐसा मानता हूं कि मैं जब तक मुझे कोई शरीर धारी गुरु नहीं मिलेंगे जो मुझसे करोड़ गुना बेहतर होंगे और जिनके चरणों में मैं अपना तन मन धन अर्पण ना करूंगा तब तक मेरी मुक्ति संभव नहीं है और ये कौन कह रहे हैं बाबा कह रहे हैं तो यह बात को समझना होगा और फिर वो ब्रह्म ज्ञान की खोज में निकलते हैं और फिर वन में भटक रहे हैं और वो वन के बारे में ऐसा बताया गया है कि वो वन इतना घना है। इतना पेड़ पौधों से भरा पड़ा है कि सूरज की एक रश्मि भी हम उन तक नहीं पहुंच रही है। हम तो ये पूरा संसार जो है ना हमारे लिए ये वन है। हम और वहां से वो सद्गुरु का वो परबह्म का एक भी विवेक का वैराग्य का ज्ञान का एक भी रश्मि हमारे हृदय तक नहीं पहुंच रहा है। वो वो वन है। अच्छा हां हम घूमते घूमते घूमते घूमते घूमते एक बंजारा उनको मिलता है और वह बंजारा बड़े दिल से पूछता है कि कहां जा रहे हैं आप लोग किस खोज में निकले हैं इतना धूप है हम तो लेकिन वो चारों लोगों को ऐसा लगता है कि हम लोग जिस खोज में निकले हैं जिस ब्रह्मज्ञान की खोज में निकले हैं वो इनको क्या बताना ये तो एक बंजारा है इसका खुद का कोई ठिकाना नहीं है ये एक समय में एक जगह रहता है तो दूसरे समय में दूसरे जगह दिखता है। तो जो खुद स्थिर नहीं है वह हमें क्या बताएगा? छोड़ो नेगलेक्ट करते हैं और वो निकल पड़ते हैं और वही फिर वन में घूमते-घूमते क्योंकि वो घन जैसे कि पहले से ही वर्णित है कि वो घना है और सूरज की एक रश्मि भी वहां नहीं पहुंच पा रही है। इतना सघन वन से घूमते घूमते घूमते घूमते घूमते घूमते घूमते रास्ता तो मिलता नहीं है। वापस उसी जगह पे आकर के पहुंचते हैं जहां वो बंजारा खड़ा होता है। अच्छा तो इससे एक बात का यह पता चलता है कि वो बंजारा स्थिर है। ये चारों अस्थिर है। अच्छा अच्छा। वाह। तो तो फिर वो बंजारा कहता है अच्छा ठीक है। अभी आपकी अकल ठिकाने आ गई। हम मैं तुमसे कह रहा था कि थोड़ा रुको। अभी तो भी मेरी बात मानो। भले ही तुम जिस मकसद से जा रहे हो मुझे वो मकसद भले ही मत बताना। लेकिन मेरी बात मानना। सूरज सर पे चढ़ा है। बहुत धूप है। तुम्हें भूख लगी होगी। तुम्हें प्यास लगी होगी। एक चतुकोर रोटी है मेरे पास। पास कुछ ज्यादा नहीं है। हम वो चतुर रोटी मैं तुम्हें देता हूं। थोड़ा सा पानी पी लो और फिर भले ही अपनी काज के लिए निकल जाओ। तो वो तीनों को लगता है अरे यार एक तो रास्ता मिल नहीं रहा है। और ये बन जा रहा है कि बार-बार आड़े आ रहा है। तो वो तीनों वापस उनको नेगलेक्ट करके आगे निकल जाते हैं। अच्छा फिर भी नहीं सुनते वो। नहीं सुनते हैं वो। वो तीनों निकल जाते हैं क्योंकि उनका एक अहंकार है कि हम अपने दम पे ब्रह्म ज्ञान पा सकते हैं। अच्छा हां हम जानते हैं हमें कहां जाना है और क्या खोजना है। हां हां तो हम हम पा लेंगे मतलब हम अपने ही दम पे पा लेंगे। हां किसी की सहायता नहीं सहायता के लिए चाहिए और वो तीनों आगे निकल जाते हैं। और पहले ही बताया गया है कि वो एक ऐसा वन है ये संसार जहां पे सूरज की एक रश्मि नहीं मिलने वाली है। और अगर ऐसे अंधेरे वन में अगर आप जा रहे हैं तो बिना पथ प्रदर्शक के आप मंजिल तक कैसे पहुंच पाएंगे? लेकिन वो तीनों नहीं समझ पाते वो बात को। वो तीनों आगे बढ़ जाते हैं। लेकिन बाबा को ऐसा लगता है कि एक व्यक्ति है मेरे सामने खड़ा है और वो मुझसे कहता है कि तुम्हें भूख लगी होगी, तुम्हें प्यास लगी होगी। पहले ये आधा चतुर रोटी खा लेना और पानी पी लेना। तो बाबा को ऐसा लगता है कि ये इंसान का प्रेम कितना निष्काम है। इसकी करुणा कितनी विशाल है कि मेरी भूख को, मेरी प्यास को यह महसूस कर रहा है। इससे बढ़कर एक व्यक्ति में गुण अगर देखना चाहे तो इससे बढ़कर कोई गुण हो ही नहीं सकता। इसका क्या स्वार्थ है इसमें? जो ये मुझे खाना खिलाना चाहता है या पानी पिलाना चाहता है। तो बाबा को ऐसा लगता है कि नहीं ये इंसान की बात मान लेनी चाहिए। हम हम बाबा वहां अपने आप को सरेंडर कर जाते हैं और बोलते हैं प्लीज दे दीजिए। तो वो जो रोटी और सूखी चटनी होती है वो लेते हैं बाबा वो खा लेते हैं और कहानी कहती है 32 व अध्याय की कि उसी समय गुरु प्रकट हो गए। अच्छा तो गुरु प्रकट हो गए। इसका मतलब क्या पहले से तो बाबा के गुरु भी नहीं थे। बाबा के ना गुरु थे ना वो तीनों के गुरु थे। बाबा यही बोलते हैं कि नहीं लेकिन एक गुरु की आवश्यकता है। हम हम बाबा की भावना ये है और बाकी वो तीनों की भावना है कि नहीं कोई गुरु की आवश्यकता नहीं है। हम तीनों अपने दम पे साक्षात्कार कर लेंगे ब्रह्म का। तो बाबा के सामने गुरु प्रकट होते हैं। तो क्या कोई दाढ़ी मूछ या फिर मुनि या यति जैसा कोई वेश धारण करके एक व्यक्ति प्रकट हो गया उस समय बंजारा के रहते या फिर बंजारा वहां से हट गया। एक मुनिधारी मतलब वेश धारण किया हुआ वो व्यक्ति वहां पे वो कन्वर्ट हो गया। मतलब वो लीला को कैसे लेनी चाहिए? क्योंकि वहां पे वो लीला खत्म हो जाती है। हम्म उसका वर्णन नहीं है आगे। बस इतना ही बोला है कि गुरु प्रकट हो जाते हैं और फिर उनको ले जाकर के कुएं में उल्टा लटकाता है। वह कहानी है। आगे की कहानी वो लेकिन मैं पहले थोड़ा इसको क्लियर करना चाहूंगा कि वो गुरु प्रकट हो जाते हैं इसका मतलब क्या? तो बहुत इंपॉर्टेंट लीला है क्योंकि यह लीला अगर साईं सतचरित्र का अगर हम नहीं समझ पाते हैं तो करोड़ जन्म लेकर के बाबा की भक्ति भी करेंगे ना तो बाबा हमारे समझ में आने वाले नहीं है क्योंकि ये वो लीला है साईं सतचरित्र की आत्मा है ये लीला और गुरु पूर्णिमा पे अगर ये लीला अगर ना खुले तो मैं ऐसा मानूंगा कि वो गुरु पूर्णिमा बेकार गया वेस्ट गया तो ये लीला यह कह कह रही है कि जब तक बाबा को यह बताना है लीला के माध्यम से कि जब तक हम अपने दम पे यात्रा कर रहे थे हम किसी की बात नहीं मान रहे थे और जब तक वो बंजारा कह रहा था कि अरे मेरी बात मानो एक प्रदर्शक को साथ ले लो लेकिन हम नहीं माने लेकिन आखिर में जब बाबा वो जब बोलते हैं कि ये छत को रोटी खा लो पानी पी लो जैसे ही मैंने उनकी बात मान ली कि वो बंजारा ही गुरु बन बन गया हम तो गुरु अलग से प्रकट नहीं हुआ वो बंजारा ही गुरु हुआ और फिर वो ले जाकर के कुएं में उल्टा लटकाते हैं। वो एक फिर वो आगे से एक अलग कहानी है। हम उस पे भी आते हैं। लेकिन मैं पहले ये लीला को ये बताना चाहूंगा कि तो जब तक हम उनकी मर्जी नहीं जान रहे हैं। हम हम अपनी ही मर्जी चला रहे हैं। हम अपने ही दम पर यात्रा करना चाह रहे हैं और उनकी मन की गहराई, उनकी तड़प, उनकी करुणा, उनके गुण, उनकी महिमा हमारे हृदय को छू नहीं रही है। उनका वो जो रोशनी है हमारे हृदय तक पहुंच ही नहीं रही है। हम अपनी ही मर्जी उन पर थोप रहे हैं। तब तक वो अनंत कोटि ब्रह्मांड का नायक को हमने बंजारा बना दिया। क्योंकि हम अपनी मर्जी चला रहे हैं। तो वास्तव में बाबा अनंत कोटि ब्रह्मांड के नायक सद्गुरु है। लेकिन हमने हमारी मर्जी उन पर थोपना चाहा इसलिए उनको हमने एक साधारण बंजारा बनाया। अगर उसके बिल्कुल विपरीत अगर हम उनकी मर्जी को मानेंगे, उनकी आज्ञा को मानेंगे और उनके आज्ञा के हिसाब से अगर हम वर्तन करने लगेंगे, अपने आप में परिवर्तन लाएंगे तो ही वो अनंत कोटि ब्रह्मांड का नायक सद्गुरु है। सद्गुरु के दर्शन दर्शन है। वाह। तो इसीलिए गुरु पूर्णिमा के दिन मेरा यह सबसे इंपॉर्टेंट मैसेज है कि उनकी मर्जी को जानना, उनकी आज्ञा को मानना और उनकी मर्जी के अनुरूप अपने आप में बदलाव लाना कि मुझ में यह कमी है। मेरे गुरु यह नहीं चाहते कि मुझ में हो। तो मुझे बदलना है। और फिर मैं हर भरसक प्रयास करूं। अपने अंदर के वो विकारों को वासनाओं को मिटा सकूं। उनकी बताई हुई रोशनी को समझ सकूं और उस पर चल सकूं। जिस दिन मैं यह कर सका कि उस दिन से मैं उनका शिष्य बन गया और तब तक मैं तो उनका एक सच्चा भक्त भी नहीं हूं। जब तक मेरी ही कामना के लिए मैं बाबा बाबा कर रहा हूं। तो आज हम समाधि मंदिर में जाते हैं। करोड़ों की संख्या में आज गुरु पूर्णिमा में लाखों लोग आएंगे। लेकिन मैं आपसे मतलब यकीन के साथ कह सकता हूं कि वह लाखों भक्तों में एक भी सच्चा भक्त नहीं होगा। मैं बहुत कड़वी बात बोल रहा हूं। बहुत बुरा लग सकता है। प्रॉब्लम यह है कि हम उनकी भावना को, उनकी मर्जी को, उनकी आज्ञा को जानते ही नहीं हैं। तो हकीकत में ये जो लाखों लाखों लोग आकर के समाधि मंदिर में जो दर्शन करके जाते हैं, हकीकत में वो बंजारे का दर्शन करते हैं, सद्गुरु का नहीं। हम ये मैं बहुत कड़वी बात बोल रहा हूं लेकिन बड़ी भोजल मन से बोल रहा हूं क्योंकि मेरी तड़प इतनी ही है कि अब भावना बदलनी चाहिए क्योंकि हम सालों से बाबा बाबा कर रहे हैं। आज भी अगर हम अपनी ही मर्ज़ियां ले जाएंगे। हम अपनी ही लिस्ट लेकर जाएंगे कामनाओं की तो उतने बड़े महानतम विभूति को, उतने बड़े महानतम सद्गुरु को, उतने बड़े ब्रह्मांड के नायक को एक साधारण सा बंजारा बना देंगे। और अब मैं तो यह कहूंगा कि फैसला आप करेंगे कि आपको उनको बंजारा बनाए रखना है जीवन भर या अनंत कोटि ब्रह्मांड का नायक सद्गुरु ये फैसला मैं आप पे छोड़ता हूं। क्या बात कही है कृष्णा जी आपने। सरल शब्दों में आपने इतनी बड़ी उसकी महानता उस बात की उस लीला की समझाई है। धन्यवाद सर। आप आए और जय श्री साईं। ओम साईं राम। जय साईं राम। इसके साथ हम अपने दर्शकों से भी विदा लेना चाहते हैं। किसी अन्य कार्यक्रम से फिर आपसे मुलाकात करेंगे। जय श्री साईं।",
    "Description": "…",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "11,016 views",
    "Likes": "494"
  },
  {
    "Title": "This is called 'True Devotion' - Sai Vachanamrit Ep 02 / This is what \"True Devotion\" is accordin...",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PbwkEXQjthk",
    "Transcript": "आ [संगीत] [संगीत] ओम साईं राम। सभी साईं भक्तों के चरणों में कोटि-कोटि वंदन। साईं वचनामृत के इस श्रंखला में एक नई कड़ी में आप सबका स्वागत है। आज का वचनामृत अध्याय 10 से कुछ ओविया हम ले रहे हैं जो बहुत गहरी है और यह ओबिया भक्ति किसको कहते हैं और भक्त की व्याख्या क्या होती है उसको डिफाइन करता हुआ यह ओवी हम सब तो अपने आप को साईं भक्त कहते हैं। लेकिन सच्चा भक्त क्या होता है? उसको इन ओमियों में बहुत गहराई से समझाया गया है। ध्यान से एक एक शब्द को सुनिएगा प्लीज। क्योंकि हम सब अपने आप को साईं भक्त मानते हैं। लेकिन बाबा के नजर में साईं भक्त कौन है? तो बाबा क्या कहते हैं साईं सचरित्र में? हम लोग उसको आज जानने का प्रयास करते हैं। अध्याय 10 ओवी नंबर 126 से 129 बाबा कहते हैं प्रेमची ना जयाचे ठाई ऐसा मानव कोची ना कोणाचे का कोणाचे का अधिष्ठान पाही आना बाबा कहते हैं प्रेम ही नहीं किसी के दिल में ऐसा कोई व्यक्ति हो ही नहीं सकता। किसी का प्रेम कहीं तो किसी का प्रेम कहीं पर है। किसी का प्रेम किसी वस्तु व्यक्ति विशेष से है तो किसी व्यक्ति का प्रेम किसी और चीज से है। लेकिन किसी व्यक्ति में प्रेम ही नहीं ऐसा व्यक्ति संसार में अभी पैदा नहीं हुआ। कुणाचे प्रेमाची जागा संतति। किसी का प्रेम का जो जगह है वह संतति है। उसका पूरा प्रेम उढेला हुआ है। कुणाचित धनमान संपत्ति और किसी का प्रेम धन में मान सम्मान में और संपत्ति में है तो किसी का प्रेम देह गेह लौकिक कीर्ति तो किसी का प्रेम घर संसार में और नाम शहरत में है लौकिक कीर्ति और विद्या प्राप्ति को होना चाहिए और किसी का प्रेम विद्या प्राप्ति में है कि मैं बहुत एजुकेटेड बनूं संसार में बहुत नाम कमा हूं तो वो उसका प्रेम का जागा है। फिर आगे जाकर के बाबा बोलते हैं प्रेम जे विषय वाटते ते सर्व जय एक वते तो जहां जहां भी आपका प्रेम है जिन जिन चीजों में भी आपका प्रेम है जिन जिन विषयों में आपका प्रेम है जिन जिन व्यक्तियों में आपका प्रेम है जिन जिन कलाओं में आपका प्रेम है वो सब वहां वहां से वो प्रेम को पहले निकालो और उस सब प्रेम को एकत्रित करो कहीं एक जगह पे उसको को जमा कर दो प्रेम जे विषय वा सर्व जय एकवटते हरि चरण मुत जे आटते और बोले वो हरि चरण नामक जो डाय बना है ना जो ढांचा बना है वो सारा प्रेम को वो ढांचे में उढेल दो बोले त ते प्रकटते भक्ति रूपे और बोले तब वह भक्ति के रूप में प्रकट हो जाता है। तो भक्त कहना बहुत आसान है कि मैं साईं भक्त हूं। लेकिन बाबा ने भक्ति क्या है? एक सच्चा भक्त कौन है? उसकी बेहतरीन व्याख्या की है। और इन मूवियों की गहराई कोई साधारण नहीं है। तो कहते हैं कि हर इंसान फंसा हुआ है। किसी ना किसी प्रेम में। किसी का प्रेम का जगा घर दरबार है, मान सम्मान है, लौकिक कीर्ति है तो किसी का धन संपत्ति है तो किसी का संतति है, संतान में प्रेम है तो किसी का कला है, कौशल है तो संसार में प्रेम ही नहीं है। ऐसा कोई व्यक्ति है ही नहीं। सिर्फ इतना ही है कि उसका प्रेम बटा हुआ है। ना जाने कितनी ही चीजों में। तो बोले जहां जहां भी आपका प्रेम बटा हुआ है जहां जहां भी आपका प्रेम न्योछावर है किसी पर तो बोले वहां वहां से वो प्रेम को पहले एकत्रित करो वहां से निकालो और वो सारा प्रेम को एक जगह पहले एकत्रित करो और वो प्रेम को हरि चरण का हरि का पाद पद्म का जो डाय है जो ढांचा है उसमें वो सारा प्रेम उढेल दो ढांचा किसको कहते हैं हम डाय किसको कहते हैं कि वहां पे हम एक लिक्विड रस उसमें डालते हैं और कुछ अंतराल के बाद जब उसको निकालते हैं तो एक आकार धर लेता है। तो वैसा ही सारा प्रेम एकत्रित करके जब वो ढांचे में साईं चरण मुशी बोला है। साईं चरण का वो ढांचा वो डाय में जब हम डालते हैं तब जाकर के बोले कुछ अंतराल के बाद वो भक्ति रूप में प्रकटता है। तो भक्ति की व्याख्या कितनी गहरी है बाबा ने हमको इस अध्याय में इस इन गोवियों में समझा दिया है। इसीलिए वह आगे एक और बहुत गहरी बात कहते हैं। मनहुनी गेह प्रपंचाला सोपा इसीलिए कहते हैं संसार को ये शरीर सौंप देना चित साईं चरणी समर्पा लेकिन चित्त जो है मन जो है वो बाबा के चरणों में विलीन हो जाए उनके चरणों में समर्पित हो जाए मग तची होईल कृपा और तब जाकर के बाबा की कृपा होगी उपाय सोपा हा एक और कहा बाबा की भक्ति करने का यह सबसे सरलतम और सहज और बहुत ही सुलभ उपाय है। और भक्ति की इस गहराई पर कबीर जी कहते हैं जब लग नाता जगत का तब लग भक्ति ना होए। जब लग नाता जगत का तब लग भक्ति ना होए। नाता तोड़े हरि भजे भक्ति कहावे सोए तो कह रहे हैं कि जब तक जगत का नाता है जगत का प्रेम है तब तक भक्ति संभव नहीं तब तक भक्ति संभव ही नहीं है। भक्ति हो ही नहीं सकती। संसार से नाता तोड़े और उसके बाद ही जीव से सच्ची भक्ति का उगम होता है। तो कबीर जी भी वही कह रहे है कि संसार का प्रेम जहां जहां भी फंसा है, आप जहां-जहां भी आपका प्रेम फसा है, वहां वहां से जब तक आप निकालेंगे नहीं। और वो सारा प्रेम भक्ति बना करके आप सद्गुरु के चरणों में उेलेंगे नहीं। तो वो भक्ति के रूप में प्रकट नहीं हो सकता। तो मैं समझता हूं कि आज सच्ची भक्ति किसको कहते हैं? उसकी व्याख्या आज हमने सुनी और मैं उम्मीद करता हूं कि भक्ति की यह व्याख्या आखिरी सांस तक हमारे हृदय से ना निकले। इस प्रार्थना के साथ मैं अपनी वाणी को विश्राम देता हूं। जय साईं राम। ओम साईं राम। इस विवेचन का सार बस इतना ही है कि हमारा घर, परिवार और संसार के प्रति प्रेम नहीं केवल मोह होता है। इसीलिए उस मोह को वहां से निकालना जरूरी है।",
    "Description": "This is called 'True Devotion' - Sai Vachanamrit Ep 02 / This is what \"True Devotion\" is according to Baba\n\nhttps://drive.google.com/drive/folder...\n\nSai Bhajanamrit\nLyricist - Pandit. K Rajdan\nSinger - Manohar Udas …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, sai, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, sai songs, saiwani, sai baba songs, miracles, saibaba miracles, chamatkar",
    "Views": "6,671 views",
    "Likes": "430"
  },
  {
    "Title": "तब... मैं स्वयं तुम्हारा ध्यान करूंगा/ जे अनिमेष चिंतीती साई/ Who's every heart beat breaths for SAI",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PCe_d_sdt8o",
    "Transcript": "Om Sai Ram Millions of salutation at the feet of all my Sai devotees From today we are going to Start a new series called Sri Sai Vachanamrut This Sai sathcharitra is a precious book, every word of which is written by Baba Any verse with depth in it from any Chapter of it will be selected and presented in front of you all with its core meaning so this is how we are going to Start the series. Just like the response you have given when the secretes of Baba's leelas were revealed may the depth of this vachanamrut enchant your hearts with the same goodwill, with this holy desire let's start this series First verse that we are going to shed light on is from chapter 37 Before heading forward a vow from chapter 23 which says, 'Baba your nectar like words are as dharma - shastra to us \" so here it's cleared that Baba's words are Vedas, Puranas and Quran for us Lets start this series accepting every deep thought from the holy book as Baba's words verse 90 from chapter 37 Baba says All those who meditate on Sai, Here I am reiterating as Baba's words so please consider, my intention is not to reduce the importance of Hemadpant, millions of salutations at his feet He has done us such a favor by embodying complete baba in the form of Granth. So to reduce his importance is not the intention. when I say that Baba has written this book, aim is to deepen one's faith towards the book. Rest hemadpant debt on us is unpayable. Till one's last breadth this debt is not waived off. so please don't keep any misconception that we are reducing the status hemadpant If we look at the book as Baba's creation then we might try to descend deep into it. Baba Says,\" All those who meditate on Sai Constantly, have marvelous experience which is worth seeing. Grateful to them, Sai himself begins to meditate on them\". He says,\" The unceasing devotion one has shown to me . the every moment one has remembered me, is a debt on me which I will be paying by meditating on him. And in the true sense the moment with which he starts meditating on us that day our true Samadhi takes place. This is Samadhi. The moment from when he will start meditating us that meditation will be extraordinary Also Samadhi or meditation is possible only by sitting at one place But either we are sitting at one place or performing day to day activities our Samadhi will remain still when baba meditates on us. This is called Sahaj Samadhi we will attain such state . This is the implied meaning the verse has. Further he Says,\" Great indeed is the importance of taking the name. For Guru himself beings to remember his devotees . . A devotee who chats Baba's name every moment Afflicts debt on him which he says will be waived off by chanting devotee's name . The meditator become one with the object of his meditation i.e Sai, both forgetting their own selves completely. This is the root of Advait theory. This is advait philosophy . After this, the devotee is no longer a devotee but becomes baba himself and baba becomes the devotee. In this way they become one. To begin the series with such a deep saying was a thought and I would like to end with Saint Kabir's saying on the Same topic , He says, \"glory of sadhguru Cannot be described in words guru has done us an infinite favor Has opened eyes of knowledge and made us see god\". Meaning this Grace showers on us when we meditate Sai constantly resulting Baba is provoked to meditate on us. with this desire that every devotee would meditate baba constantly and will make him their debtor thereby leading baba to meditate on them",
    "Description": "https://drive.google.com/drive/folder...\n\nसाई भजनामृत\nगीतकार - पंडित. के राजदान \nगायक - मनोहर उदास …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "sai, saihridgat, saibaba, saileela, saileelarahasya, shirdi, satsang, best youtube channel on saibaba, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, सच्ची श्रद्धा, श्रद्धा",
    "Views": "7,496 views",
    "Likes": "488"
  },
  {
    "Title": "A Devotional - Sai Vachanamrit - Episode",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RPXS2kaf7os",
    "Transcript": "Heartfelt salutations to all sai devotees Priceless commandments of Sai Baba which are filled with knowledge, teachings and wisdom there are countless pearls and diamonds hidden in this sai satcharitra therefore this is a small attempt to choose such a pearl and put it in front of you people hope it touches your hearts before saying something on this I would like to present a verse from sai satcharitra chapter 3 verse 4 \"Oh my revered listeners! I am but a speck of dust from your feet and I'm not ashamed of entreating you for the favor of your attention\". with this prayer let's start this series Baba says from chapter 45 verse 25 \"Can he become a true sai devotee, who can bear to be away from sai even for a moment?, can he be considered as attached to sai's feet who is not detached from the worldly life?\" Who is the true devotee of sai? today we all believe to be his true devotee but his view is defined in this verse he who can bear to be away from sai even for a moment can he be a sai devotee further can he be considered as attached to sai's feet who is not detached from the worldly life so these are the words which we are going to illustrate In this verse one pointed devotion is tried to conveyed steadfast devotion means to be monotheist towards one's deity one follows or believes in In our Hindu philosophy 33 million gods and goddesses have been envisaged on one hand 33 million gods and goddesses presence is firmed whereas on the other one pointed devotion is also cited might it be any holy book or any sadhguru or any religion, steadfast devotion is their catch phrase without it the devotion is incomplete if we accept Baba as our sadguru then we should have single minded fidelity in devotion towards him if a man or a woman is devoted to some other guru then towards him he or she should have single minded devotion if someone is faithful to any God for example Shiva or Ganesha or any goddess their devotion to their adoration should be unwavering let there be happiness or sorrow in life no matter what the situation is, one should cry or plead in front of none but one's deity strong must be the reverence, the faith, the dedication to one's deity which is called as steadfast devotion if I am a sai devotee and to fulfill my wishes I revere other gods and goddesses waiting for some experience and satisfaction of my wishes that for sure is not one pointed devotion let my baba's will be done either I receive heaven or I receive hell this is one pointed devotion Dnyaneshwar maharaj in the 13th chapter of Dyaneshwari, yoga of distinction between the field and the knower of the field, reprimands saying because of one's desire a man revere Shiva on Monday, Ganesha on Tuesday, vishnu on Wednesday, guru on Thursday and so on such a devotion with wandering faith is adulterous devotion as a whore is in search of a new customer daily so she could earn, in the same way we worship different deities as per our desires if for some reason my guru to whom I have unwavering faith does not fulfill my wish or if it takes time then my faith starts shaking my unwavering faith is disturbed saint kabir says,\"leaving my beloved rama one to revere other is like a son of a prostitute who cannot give acquaintance of his father\". in the same way if we seek oblation from several gods and goddesses for the fulfillment of wishes and if it is fulfilled we will not be able to say which deity completed it now the question is, if the glory of one pointed devotion is so immense and deep then why 33 million God and goddesses created this question would fall to anyone that why is there a concept of so many gods and gods then Islam is far better than us which says there is no one but Allah same goes with Christianity why our Hindu philosophy has the provision of 33 million gods and goddesses . This will leave one astray it is very essential to understand this, Might be in that era the population of India was 33cr thus the feeling would be that the person who has entered this world in a human form is no less than a goddess or a deity if you look the concept with such a huge heart then the whole scenario is changed wherever I look whoever I meet, for me he/she is no less than a goddess or a deity this may have been the belief behind the concept of 33 gods and goddesses but today we have divided our faith this means that one should be loyal to one's guru but there should be equal treatment towards the rest of the gods and goddess. There should be equal reverence for them, there should be no bitter feelings. rather, if we have to go to other God and goddesses or if we need to step into their temples then bow your heads with as much reverence as their devotees bow before them. with a prayer that, \"oh Lord I bow at your feet with the prayer that my devotion towards my guru may increase million times that of now\". in this way if we can worship other gods and goddesses then it is a one pointed devotion complete one pointed towards one but at the same time same respect and reverence to other deities as well as religious gods not only for the Hindu gods and goddesses but also for other religion deities whatever you ask for while asking let it be selfish desire, maybe your heart is not engrossed in selfless devotion now, but the ask should be in front of your guru only. It should be one pointed I will put my ask only in front of you Lord whether it is fulfilled or not I always say, \"O Sai from your court if I get hardship, pain and agony I won't leave your side and from other court even if I get heaven I will not be allured\". There is a negative aspect to this which is more dangerous sometimes in the name of one pointed devotion we become more fascist as the Muslim fundamentalist say there should be no worship of anyone except Allah in this entire cantonment some people take this in such a way which gives rise to bitterness in respect for other religions. A kind of remorse, magnanimity does not come in them. similarly there are some Hindu fundamentalists and some Christians too Baba was incarnated to universalize This does not mean that we need to convert into other religion. Baba never meant this. Baba's heart was so big that if a devotee from different religion or pantheon would visit his court he used to increase their faith into their respective religion or deity. if today we meet someone who is a disciple of other guru or a worshiper of other God then one should be cautious over speaking any such word which would harm his or her faith if I am true Sai bhakt If Baba has given me the light, the knowledge that I can increase his faith in into his guru multiple times then I should do it but if I am unable then at least I should remain silent and I won't drag my cruise efficiency in front of him we should not do such mistake. one pointed devotion doesn't mean that I can brag about my guru in front of everyone. Baba never thought this. Baba always said if you can ascend the faith of others into their respective guru suppose being Hindu I have read much about Christianity so while sitting with some Christian people if I can increase their faith into their own religion then Baba is showering his blessings over me. same is with Islam if the Lord has given me the wisdom of Islam then instead of shaking their belief I should give fidelity to it. then Baba will definitely shower his blessing on you because this is His whole teachings this is His sufiana approach This is one pointed devotion Dr Pundit's devotion from chapter 11 of Sai satcharitra is an best example to understand this. When doctor Pandit visits shirdi for the first time. He addresses baba as a Muslim Fakir. and he himself was a disciple of a Brahmin Guru But he prostates in the feet of baba as he does in front of his Guru and smears sandalwood paste on baba's forehead regarding baba and his Guru the same Therefore Baba accepts it delightedly Till then baba never allowed any devotee to smear a tilak on his forehead This story conveys deep message Dr Pundits Devotion was so firm that Religion of baba never meant an obstacle in front of his Gum Bhakti He looked his Brahmin Guru in baba And with that feeling he smeared tripundera on Baba's forehead for Baba said that his guru Bhakti is so superior and firm, what about me even in my place Bramha Vishnu and Mahesh would also bow in front of and would smear his tripundra so this story is an unique example explaining one pointed devotion Therefore baba says, \"There are many saints in this world but one father is the only one\". His Concerne for us is uncomparable. verse from chapter 12th which affirms this topic \"Far greater may be the fame Z other Gurus, our gum may have none git But full faith must be reposed only in our own Guru. This is the moral here\". In the end, one pointed devotion I would just Say that with deep reverence for your guru look at the whole world There should be same respect for the Gods and Goddesses of the whole world same devotion, but what our guru said is the ultimate-truth for us. Baba's teaching is that there should never be any bitterness towards other religions or pantheons even in dream, there should be no inequality On the Contrary, Baba used to say ,\"If you have a little knowledge about someone's Guru then strengthen his faith in Him\".",
    "Description": "https://drive.google.com/drive/folder...\n\nSai Bhajanamrit\nLyricist – Pandit K. Razdan\nSinger – Manohar Udhas …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "9,522 views",
    "Likes": "434"
  },
  {
    "Title": "साई प्रार्थना - स्वयं साई रचित (अध्याय २५) | Sai Prarthana (Adhyay - 25)",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j7wBgbjrBOs",
    "Transcript": "om sai ram My sincere bow to all the devotees of sai in today's episode we will take a prayer from Sai satcharitra which belongs to its 25th chapter and this prayer has extraordinary importance as this book is baba's self written autobiography for this I will present of verse(ovi) from second chapter in front of you all when hemadpant expresses his desire to write about life story and teachings of Baba then baba tells him, \"you cannot write my life story, you just subdue your ego and offer it to my feet. The day you will become ego less I shall narrate my own tale myself through you\". those two quotes of Baba it is better to keep a record he has my full support he is but the instrument I myself will write my own story my own tale I shall narrate myself and thus I shall fulfill the wishes of my devotees he should subdue his ego and offer it at my feet when he would become ego less then i would write my story through him so this book is not baba's life story indeed is his autobiography now in this autobiography there is a prayer in its 25th chapter so in this sense it would not be wrong to say that he has given us the prayer just as a father teaches his child to walk by holding his hand, in the same way Baba teaches his devotees how to pray by concentrating the mind, being involute and meditating grasp each and every letter of this prayer in your heart I have presented the prayer in Hindi translated from marathi version as it is in front of you so I request you all to listen each and every word carefully with unwavering mind and fill the reservoir of your heart with its sweet nectar on savoring it you won't even know when you have surrendered yourself on baba's feet so I am leaving you with this sincere prayer om sai ram o sai the compassionate one come to my rescue because I have learned with all my experiences that this worldly life allows not a moment's rest now don't entangle me into this futile cycle of births and deaths o sadguru our nature has always been to live arbitrarily and to run after sensual pleasures and to see none but evil, to talk none but evil and to do none but evil further in life. So all compassionate one free us from this venomous sensual pleasures and turn our minds inward in this ocean of worldly life we are carried away rudderless on the tumultuous waves give us your hand and free us from the bondage of worldly life the senses run scampering and are provoked into sinful behavior build a dam on the wild course of this river so that the senses may turn back as long as the senses are not controlled and turned inward the self can never be revealed and without that how can one enjoy the highest bliss? life will then have been wasted wife, son, a host of friends not one of these will be of any use when the end comes. you and you alone are the friend the companion to the end only you can give us happiness and liberation oh maharaj by the power of your grace open up the meshes of karma akarma to relieve the pain and suffering and to uplift the poor and the meek by your compassion o the most holy sairaya eradicate this evil of argumentation and disputes may the tongue get addicted to taking your name all the time o love Incarnate, inspire such love and affection in our heart that resolves and doubts all vanish and I forget this body, the home and material possessions help me conquer my ego may your name be remembered all the time so that all else is forgotten may my mind be calm and steady shedding its fickleness and caprice o sadguru if you embrace us and take to your refuge then The Dark Knight of ignorance will disappear and we shall abide happily in your light what can we then want?",
    "Description": "साई प्रार्थना  - स्वयं साई रचित (अध्याय २५) | Sai Prarthana (Adhyay - 25)\n\n॥ॐ श्री साईनाथाय नमः ॥\nशिर्डी में होनेवाले इस तीन दिवसीय सत्संग मे शामील होने के लिए निचे दि हुई लिंक पर अपना नाम रजिस्टर करे. https://forms.gle/hm8gSSDwa3z6tBUq6\n\n॥ॐ श्री साईनाथाय नमः ॥\nशिर्डी येथील तीन दिवसीय सत्संगात सहभागी होण्यासाठी  खाली दिलेल्या लिंकवर आपले नाव रजिस्टर करा. https://forms.gle/hm8gSSDwa3z6tBUq6\n\nRegister your name on the link given below to attend the 3 days satsang in Shirdi https://forms.gle/hm8gSSDwa3z6tBUq6\n\n#sai  #saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "23,665 views",
    "Likes": "565"
  },
  {
    "Title": "पूणे का अदभुत साई सत्संग",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eAbRm6EU0jI",
    "Transcript": "First of all, I offer countless salutations at the feet of all the Sai devotees present here. IHemadpant at one place in Sai satcharitra says, 'You listeners are the king, and I am just the dust at your feet.' My only request, my only plea, is that whatever I say here today or as Hemadpant Ji says, whatever I write, just listen to it attentively and try to understand it. This is my only wish, and in making this wish, I feel neither shame nor embarrassment. Hemadpant says this in Sai Satcharitra, and I will begin with the same words. I do not consider myself to be a great scholar or enlightened person compared to all of you. But yes, whatever little experience life has given me, I will share with you today. When I speak on Sai Satcharitra, it is spontaneous; I do not plan it beforehand. Whatever Baba makes me say, I speak and leave. Until now, I did not know what I would speak about, only that I would speak on Sai Satcharitra. I wished to share some chapter or story before talking about Sai Satcharitra, but I was not sure which one. So, I sought Baba's guidance, and he showed the number 13. So, I will take the 13th chapter, as per his wish. Many of you must already be reading Sai Satcharitra. Please raise your hands if you read it. And how many of you have listened to me on YouTube? Let's begin now with the thirteenth chapter, which contains the story of Bhimaji Patil. We will discuss that story and delve into its depth, trying to understand what light Baba wants to shed on us through this story. Sai sathcharitra is not merely a book with miracles rather it is filled with precious teaching and Baba says these teachings are to be reached through every story. If we do not grasp these teachings and only focus on the miracles, we will miss the message that Baba wants to convey through the story If we are not able to decipher it then reading Sai Satcharitra is of no benefit There is always a deeper lesson behind every action that Baba took In the Sai Satcharitra, there is a verse: 'vedant vishay ati gahaan, virakti bhakti nyan jod deun, aise granth karte nirmaan, guru krupevin durghat' This verse clearly explains the depth of the Sai Satcharitra. It is said that the essence of Vedanta, Sant Dnyaneshwar Maharaj presented the teachings of the Bhagavad Gita to the world as \"Dnyaneshwari.\" Then, Sant Eknath Maharaj presented it in the form of \"Eknathi Bhagwat.\" Following that, Samarth Ramdas Swami presented it as \"Dasbodh,\" and later, Sant Tukaram Maharaj presented it as the \"Tukaram Gatha.\" Today, standing on the same ground, I present before you the \"Sai Satcharitra.\" It is an honor for me. This text is one that reveals the profound subject of Vedanta, and hence, this text holds extraordinary significance. Just as the sky is endless and vast, so is the character of Baba — profound and boundless. To fully understand its depth, only Baba himself can reveal it Today, if I am sitting in front of you to unfold every one of his leelas (divine acts), this body and voice may be mine, but the words flowing from my heart are Baba’s, not mine. Baba himself has said, \"Who else but me can open up this character?\" Without his grace, not a single leela can be revealed, as each leela is deep and speaks to the essence of the Upanishads and Vedanta, conveying the essence of the Bhagavad Gita. How many of you have read the Dnyaneshwari? Please raise your hands. Now, why do I ask this? If you have read the Dnyaneshwari, you’ll notice that some verses have been directly included in the Sai Satcharitra as it is. Hemadpant didn't even hesitate to copy the verses rather he thought to include wisdom from wherever he gets either from Gyaneshwari or from Eknathi Bhagwat When Baba resided in Shirdi, he made his devotees recite texts such as the Adhyatma Ramayana, Eknathi Bhagwat, and Dnyaneshwari. Why was this? Because, at that time, Sai Satcharitra did not exist. Therefore, Baba used these scriptures to enlighten his devotees for months. and if any devotee without reading of scripture would go directly to Dwarkamai for Baba's darshan then He would make them aware of it it reveals how much sincere with respect to scripture Baba was! But Baba's yearning is indescribable. He thought that millions would come to Shirdi after me leaving my body And the depth of my heart, the yearning of my soul, why shouldn't I present that to the world in the form of a scripture? So, he (Baba) chose Hemadpant. When Hemadpant asks Baba if he could write his character (biography), Baba first says, 'What will you write about my character? First, dissolve your ego at my feet. The day you become free of ego, the day the 'I' within you dies and is erased, that day I will enter you, and I will write my character myself.' So, Baba have said these words, to think that this scripture was written by Hemadpant is the greatest mistake. You see, when I view a scripture as the creation of a person, I might diminish its value. But the moment I believe that each letter of this scripture has been written by my Baba himself, I will read each letter with such focus and attention, I will pour my very life into it. And if I have read this scripture, I have done so with the feeling that each letter has been written by my Baba. For me, this is Baba's autobiography, not just a saint's life story. It is Baba's autobiography, which he himself has written. Engrave this in your heart and mind: every word of this has been composed by Baba. When I read it with that faith, with that light in my heart, when I open the scripture, perhaps the divine jewels that Baba speaks of will pour into my heart. But if I look at it from the perspective that it was written by a devotee of Sai named Hemadpant, I may not be able to pour that much life into it. That’s why they say, when the perspective is right, the view becomes right. If the perspective is wrong, the view too is distorted. So, if you view this scripture as if each word has come from Baba himself, from Baba's heart, from Baba's soul, then this becomes Baba's autobiography. And when viewed from this perspective, how does the scripture look? It looks the way it does through our perception. Today, of all the Leelas (divine stories) I have opened, those who have seen them on YouTube, I hope each Leela has touched your heart. And once a Leela is revealed, it cannot be erased from your heart, your mind. Once its depth is opened, it is stored in your permanent memory. That is its special quality. And if the Leela does not open to you, then at most, you may feel a little excited while reading it, but only the first time. By the second or third time, its essence will diminish, and it will become like chewing gum. Because how many times can you read the same Leela without getting bored? But if the philosophical mystery behind the Leela —the mystery written in the Upanishads—if that mystery is reached, then the Leela becomes eternal. It no longer gives momentary happiness; it fills you with eternal light. That’s the difference. Now, during Baba's lifetime, while Baba was still alive, several scriptures were already written in Baba’s name. So, 'Sai Satcharitra' wasn’t the first scripture. There wasn’t even a need to write 'Sai Satcharitra' because many scriptures were already popular in Baba’s name. But still, Baba created 'Sai Satcharitra' because Baba knew the difference between an informative scripture and an educational scripture. He poured his soul into this scripture, and if you have seen my videos, I have proven one thing: Baba said, 'Now I am going, but I will reappear in the form of an eight-year-old child.' I have proven that the eight-year-old child is this scripture. So don’t imagine that a physical child will be born. That child is this scripture; every word in it is an avatar (incarnation). If someone is curious about what the eight-year-old child is, then there’s a video on 'Sai Hridgat' titled 'Baba has already appeared in the form of an eight-year-old child.' Watch that, and it will become clear. So, this eight-year-old child is the 'Sai Satcharitra.' The more calmly and deeply you read and understand each word, the closer you will come to Baba's soul. If you were to ask me, 'From the entire scripture, is there a verse that you think is the most important?'—if you asked me that, I would say that from the twentieth chapter, there is one verse that, 'purn bramhswarupchyut, aisa ha jivatma purvavat, kadhi tari swaswarupaprat, pavava nishrit he dheya' in my view, encompasses the essence of the entire 'Sai Satcharitra.' the soul, which is in human form, has descended from the form of complete Brahma (the ultimate reality). In truth, this soul is none other than the complete Brahma. Its true nature is that of complete Brahma. But it has descended from that level and fallen to the lower plane of the body. it means, one day, it will certainly regain its true form of complete Brahma. That is the goal of life, it says. So, such profound meaning is conveyed in this one verse. Baba is saying that every human being who appears here in a human body is, in reality, the complete Brahma. However, the soul has forgotten its true form of complete Brahma and now identifies with the body. It has placed itself at such a low level. Therefore, the aim of this scripture, and of Baba, is to help the soul return to its true form. And that is why 'Sai Satcharitra' was created. So first of all, other scriptures or books that might have been written in Baba’s name—there were many that existed even when Baba was alive—today, Baba is no longer in physical form, but still, new books keep coming out. However, they cannot compare to 'Sai Satcharitra.' Just as countless stars cannot match the brightness of the sun, similarly, all other books that are shining faintly in Baba’s name cannot compare to the brilliance of 'Sai Satcharitra.' their is a huge different. Let me take a leela as i want you all to understand the creation of every leela in every chapter Whenever you read 'Sai Satcharitra,' read it in the light of this knowledge. Let me take one Leela (divine story) as an example: the Leela from the thirteenth chapter about Bhimaji Patil. How many of you remember that Leela? For those who haven’t read it, let me explain it briefly. So, Bhimaji Patil has been spoken about so positively that it is said he was a prosperous man of the house. Whoever visited his home, he would offer them food. He never felt disheartened, and his face was always cheerful. He was such a noble person. However, he fell prey to tuberculosis and started coughing up blood. Since he belonged to the Patil family, there was no shortage of money. He consulted top doctors and Ayurvedic practitioners and did everything possible, but the disease kept worsening, worsening, and worsening, as if he only had a few days left. During this time, he wrote a letter to Nana Saheb Chandorkar, mentioning his deteriorating condition. We all know about Nana Saheb Chandorkar's deep devotion to Baba. In response, he wrote back, advising Bhimaji to visit his Guru, saying that this could be the last possible remedy, and perhaps he might get a new life. Bhimaji had become so weak that he couldn't even walk. So, four people lifted him and placed him in a bullock cart And then they bring him to Shirdi. Just like carrying a lifeless body, they place him in front of Baba, As soon as Baba sees him, he turns to Shama and says, ‘Shama, how many more thieves will you keep bringing and placing at my feet? How many more thieves will you bring to my feet? This is very important. Baba never utters words without purpose. He specifically called him a ‘thief,’ which is crucial because if we miss this word, the true essence of the leela (divine play) won’t unfold Now, when we read this, the question naturally arises—why did Baba call him a thief? Look at how much respect Bhimaji Patil received in the beginning. He was a wealthy and prosperous man, always giving food to those who visited him. On one hand, he was highly praised, but on the other hand, Baba directly referred to him as a thief. Despite this, Bhimaji, in his suffering, prayed earnestly to Baba, and Baba's heart melted. Then Baba instructed, ‘Take him away and keep him in the gotha (a cowshed). That is the environment he needs. That will be his medicine.’ Bhimaji was extremely wealthy. If he wished, he could have arranged the best medical treatment in a well-furnished house or another comfortable place. But Baba chose the gotha for him, and that itself became the cure for his illness. The leela says that Bhimaji Patil had two significant dreams. These two dreams became the basis for Baba curing his disease. In the first dream, he saw himself as a school student. He had to recite a speech but was unable to do so. Because of this, the teacher kept hitting him on his back with a cane, mercilessly beating him to the point of exhaustion in dream. In the second dream, he saw himself lying on his back while someone rolled a heavy grinding stone (varvanta in Marathi) over his chest, causing him unbearable pain. After experiencing these two intense sufferings—both in dreams his coughing up of blood suddenly stopped. Slowly, gradually, he started recovering, as if Baba had filled him with the elixir of life once again, just through these two dreams. Now, those who have read this story before already understand it. But even those hearing it for the first time can grasp how Baba, through these two sufferings from Dreams, cured an illness. In those days, tuberculosis was like today’s AIDS. Just as a cancer patient in the fourth stage is not expected to survive, similarly, in those times, if someone had reached the stage of coughing up blood due to tuberculosis, their survival was considered impossible. But Baba, by giving just two dreams, through two visions, granted life to that person. We all know this story, but the question is—through this story, through this divine play, what does Baba want to make us understand? That is very important. If we fail to grasp that, then even if we read this divine play a hundred times, it will hold no meaning, no relevance. If its message, its wisdom, its essence does not touch my heart, if I do not reach its Vedantic depth through this divine play, then when I read about these miracles, they may excite me for a moment, but they will not remain in my heart. However, if the science behind it is revealed, then it reaches our soul, and from there, nothing can shake it. That is why if Sai satcharitra is unfolded then it reaches directly to the soul and no one can rob it from there. So, this is how Sai Satcharitra is structured Before coming to the depth of this story let's look at some initial verse that help you know the structure of charitra. From Verse 4 - Chapter 13 - jari mi zalo fakir, ghar n daar befikir, baislo eka thayi stir, sari kir kir tyaguni i, a wandering fakir, having renounced everything sits in dilapidated mosque tari ti maya anivaar, mala hi gaanji varchr var, mi visre, pari tijla n visar maz ti nirntr kavtali it never stops deceiving me. These are Baba’s words. He is explaining how powerful Maya’s grip is on every human being. If Baba himself acknowledges this, then how cautious must we ordinary people be? Everyone must understand its impact Baba further says - adi mayach ti harichi, tredha udvite bramha dikanchi, teth maz dublya fakirachi, varta kaichi tij pudhe Maya belongs to Hari; later, it deceives even the greatest sages and gods. Then what can a mere wandering fakir like me do against it?\" Here, Baba humbles himself in the face of Maya, emphasizing how deeply it grips the world. and further says - harich hoil jevha prasann, tevhach hoil vichinn, vina avichinn hari bhajan, maya nirsan nohe pa On one hand, Baba explains how formidable and difficult it is to transcend Maya and on the other, he reveals the way to overcome it When Hari is pleased, only then can Maya be destroyed. Without uninterrupted devotion to Hari, Maya cannot be overcome. On one hand, Baba explains how difficult it is to transcend Maya, and on the other, to overcome it unceasing devotion of hari It means that if even for a moment Baba does not leave our remembrance, only then can we overcome this Maya Now, the question arises—how are these verses associated with the story of bhimaji patil? very deep association Maya in this world is everything we perceive through our senses. If we view this world separate from God, then the entire visible universe itself is Maya. \"If I see this world disconnected from God, then it appears as mere illusion (Maya). However, if I attain God's vision, His grace, and direct realization, then this entire visible world transforms into God Himself. In other words, until we receive divine grace and experience spiritual realization, this world remains Maya. But once we attain true realization of the soul, the entire universe appears as an extension of the Divine. Until that experience occurs, everything is Maya. So, one definition of Maya is this illusionary world, but in a more tangible sense, Maya is also defined as ‘Kamini’ (desire for women) and ‘Kanchan’ (desire for wealth). The fundamental attraction that a man has towards a woman or vice versa is also referred to as Maya In this chapter, Maya specifically refers to ‘Kamini.’ Now, you may ask—why is it interpreted this way? Why kamini ? Why we should consider the (kamini)opposite gender as Maya. Why should we take the word \"opposite gender\" when Baba is talking about Maya? The answer is in the next part of the story. In this same chapter, verse number 166, there is a verse that came Remember the first dream, where Bhimaji Patil was asked to recite a poem, but he couldn't. He couldn't speak it, and because of that, he was beaten with a stick. He had to suffer that pain in the dream. What was that poem? Baba had also wrote it in the Granth. The secret of the entire leela is in that poem. The secret of the whole leela is hidden in that poem. What is the poem? \"She, to whom stepping into any other house is like stepping on a snake's head\" It talks about a chaste wife, a faithful woman It says that if she steps into the house of another man, she feels as if she has stepped on the head of a cobra with its hood raised. That's how she feels. And then it says,\"The words from whose mouth are as hard to obtain, as wealth from a miser's hand\" The words that come out of that chaste woman's mouth are very rare, as rare as a greedy person giving up money. This means she is a woman of few words. She is so reserved. It basically states the sign of faithful women And then it goes on to say,\"To whom her husband's company is the highest happiness,though there be no wealth in the house\" She finds everything in the company of her husband.\" Even if there is not a single grain of food in the house, her husband's company is everything for her. And then it says,\"And who acts calmly, with her husband's approval; Only she is the true 'sati' amongst men\" The one who lives according to the feelings of her husband is a truly faithful wife. But here's a condition : the husband must be good. I must add it If the husband is going on the wrong path, these lines don't apply to that person. I want to make that clear first. If the husband is a great person, then how should a chaste wife be? She should be like this. He says that she would never go against her husband's words, not even in a dream. That is a chaste wife. Now, the question is, why was Bhimaji Patil forced to recite this poem? And why couldn't he? It is clear from this that Bhimaji had committed a sin of adultrey, either in this life or a previous one. And Baba showed him that because of that sin, he was suffering from this big disease today. So first, I'm telling you why you got caught in the clutches of this disease. Through this poem, I'm telling you that because of this sin, you have such a big disease. So after reading this leela, if we ever have a thought about another person's wife, this leela of Bhimaji Patil should be imprinted in our minds.imprinted in our minds. The question is, why this poem and no other? and Baba had also started the leela with how strong maya is It tells how dangerous this attraction of another female/male is Every individual face's this maya sooner or later So beware of it or else such big disease like TB are waiting for you with open arms So adhyay is about that alertness Hence first he was made aware of his sins because of which you are facing such severe disease That's why it is said that every miracle is not just miracle If there is no light of knowlede behind the miracle(leela) then that leela is of no use So why this poem only? Why were they not able to recite it? Why did the teacher beated them with the stick? So this was the fault, this was the problem, this was the sin which had happend by them That's why Baba had used those word's that \"How many more such thieves will you bring and put at my feet shyama?\" Don't take it to heart but there's a very low level word which I have to use it otherwise this leela's essence won't open up Those who waste their life in the attraction of another woman These people are called with a low-class word i.e.\"Chamadi Chor\" So Baba called that man a \"Chhamdi Chor,\" saying, \"How many such thieves will you bring and put at my feet, Shyama?\" Here it is not only said for Bhimaji Patil Bhimaji Patil is alive in all of us This instinct is present in all of us either it has already occured or it is goinig to occur at any phase of life After this, there is no one who is not touched by this. To be very honest If Baba has documented these leelas for us in the Satcharitra, then these things are very deep. And every person at some point in their life goes through these things. They get attracted to the opposite gender. So Baba didn't just cure his pain and disease, But he also showed him why he gets caught in such diseases. He also showed him the reason, and then he cured him by rolling that stone on his chest. I believe that any true Guru... even if I am suffering from a big disease, but if the Guru cures me of it without making me realize my sin, then I would say that the Guru is also committing a sin Do you understand what I'm saying? If my Guru cures me of my disease without making me realize my sins, then he is also committing a sin. But if he first washes away the cause of my disease and then takes me out of the disease, then he is a true Guru. Do you agree with what I'm saying? If only miracle is everything.... That he went to Baba, cried and his disease got cured But why did the disease happened in the first place what is the cause of that disease? What kind of flaw do I have? What kind of passion have I fallen into? What kind of ignorance am I suffering from? Until he tells me that, and just cures the disease, then I would call such a person a magician, not a Guru. But Baba is a true Guru, so he first didn't cure the disease He first beat him with a stick to show him the reason for the disease. That's why he calls Bhimaji Patil a thief, \"How many such thieves will you bring and put at my feet?\" So the word \"thief\" meant How many such \"chamdi chor\" will you bring and put at my feet? f you open it up this way, then no other Granth can compare with the Sai Satcharitra. And in my whole life, I have tried to understand what Baba's heart and soul are saying behind every leela What enlightenment does he want to give? I have made a video on every leela. Please watch them. That way, we will reach Baba's heart and form a true relationship with him. we will then have a true connection with Baba Otherwise, there are two ways to worship, to ask, or to believe in Baba. One is to do it in your own way. \"As is the feeling in one's mind'so is the experience\"(ovi from sai satcharitra) This is one way And this way of worship is very easy Because in this I have received a free will to worship Baba as I want But there's another way to understand his will and change yourself according to it. This is tough This is very tough First one is very easy Because me will is working right! \"As is the feeling in one's mind ,so is the experience\" We spend our whole lives saying this, but his will is also saying something. And this Sai Satcharitra is his will. The complete sai satcharitra is Baba's will So if we live as per their will then just as he is complete, and as I said in that verse, \"Poorn Parbhramachut aisa ha jeevatma purvavat kadhi tari lagel swaswarupa prati nischit hai dhey\" That means this is the motive. Our journey till absolute parabrahma is possible We can reach where Baba is standing. We can also reach that higher state If we understand Baba's will and live accordingly But if we only do as per our wish And how many time will Baba also accept our will , you only please tell Today so many people are sitting over here How many times have we went to Baba with our wishes and how many would have been fulfilled Once, twice, maybe three times. How is it possible for all our wishes to be fulfilled every time? But still, he is so merciful In the beginning, he gives a little treat, as he says in the 27th chapter, \"I put jaggery in the beginning so that they can drink the bitter medicine later.\" So, in the beginning, I do some miracles for you on your level and fulfill your wishes. But my main purpose is to give you nectar. To give you the nectar of this Sai Satcharitra How can I fulfill your wishes every time? How can I fulfill your fair and unfair demands? If I start fulfilling your unfair demands, then there is no bigger villain than me in this world. Because I would be leading you on the wrong path. You would get used to it. You would get used to living a bad life. I am a true Guru. If I have fulfilled one of your wishes,I know that I have fed you a little poison. Then later, I have to change the experience for that. The 27th chapter has the solution for this: \"I have fed him poison, now I have to guide him on the right path.\" Otherwise, he will get lost. He will get used to miracles. He will bring a new wish every time. And Baba can never do that. Baba is a true Guru. My words might sound bitter, but they are the truth. He cannot fulfill all our fair and unfair demands. It's impossible But what he wants to give is so vast, so vast. It's so complete, so full of satisfaction and joy, and so full of enlightenment that our imagination cannot even reach it. That's the problem. We are throwing away diamonds and pearls and asking for pebbles and stones. That is our condition. As Baba say's in 32th chapter, Nobody will dig when asked to, The treasure is overflowing\" \"If someone is a truly a child of their mother, they should only dig up the treasure\" What they have arrived to give, and what are we asking from them They came to shower us with gems and pearls, and here we are going to them asking for stones and pebbles again and again When we go to the Samadhi Mandir, when he sees our faces, he must be thinking, \"This foolish person has come again.\" \"He has come with the same wish again.\" He doesn't even want to look at what my will is, what my heart's desires are, what my expectations are from him. I also have some expectations towards you Now consider if there's a child Is the child supposed to only ask for things from his parents forever Now the parents have grown old, atleast now consider what the parents want from the child But nope! the child is only concerned about what he is getting. What will you then call such an child? Same condition is of us infront of Baba We are only considered about fulfilment of our wishes We don't even bother Baba's will, his heart, his agony There is a verse in the 43rd chapter of Sai Satcharitra where he says, \"I gave some wealth, some children, and to some worldly happiness and peace.I gave you everything, but you didn't even care about getting spiritual knowledge.\" What a line ! He says that when he was leaving his body, he took this pain with him I gave you all you asked for wealth,children, I fulfilled all your demands. But now I am responsible your lack of spiritual knowledge He is expressing is remorse The problem is today not even a single person is their to talk about Baba's actual teaching's There are crores of people today who talk about miracles You can go on social media and see every channel talks about miracles, experiences, and leelas. How many miracles will you see? He keeps performing them every day. New people will come, and they will have some new miracle, but what will you get from it? What kind of enlightenment will you get in your life? And how many such miracles will you run after? They don't even think about what he wants to tell them through those miracles. What is the longing of his heart? Nobody thinks that even for a moment So sai satcharit is that The problem is that this religious book won't alllow us into it so easily That's the problem We read it. We'll read once, twice but as it doesn't enter our hearts so deeply, we are unable to understand it's depth so we get bored and move to next book This book's a little tough , we are unable to understand so we end up reading \"Devotee's experiences of Sai Baba\", this experience of Sai Baba etc. and we have plenty informative knowlege books that way But the sun of knowledge, is of nobody's interest, nobody want's to listen that. We don't have anyone who will talk about it so who will listen. That's the main thing That's the issue And then they ask \"Is Baba not in other religious books?\" Ofcourse he is who is denying. But the creation of this book says\"The ultimate knowledge(Vedant) is very profound in this\" I'll again come on this verse Despair, devotion, knowledge, So to make that ultimate knowledge(vedant) easier,simpler to understand he created these leela's So that the profound, deep hidden knowledge of vedant could become easy to understand Now here I told you one leela of bhimaji patil But after listening this leela, now whenever you here the statement \"How many more such thieves will you bring shama?\" you will recall my words and it will touch your heart. You can't forget So this englightenment works this way. You can never forget this leela Whenever the 13th chapter comes in front of you, every word I have said will touch your heart. This is how the Satcharitra was created. And Baba himself in the satcharitra say this in chapter 41, verse 163 \"Unless I receive your grace, reading the pothi is a futile exercise. \" He's saying that if Baba's grace is not granted then reading this pothi is just a headache \"Unless I receive your grace, reading the pothi is a futile exercise. It is even more difficult to understand it. This much Baba I tell you quite frankly\" He furthers adds that understanding is a much more difficult task than that If Baba's grace is not received, the problem is you don't get entry in the book till then and as we don't get entry in it, many people read it for a few days but later on get engaged in other books and then get caught up their And then they start to gather information they think that more the information is gathered the more knowledgeable they will become But that is not how it is Depth is required We need the depth of the subject. We need Baba's depth. If we want to know Baba'sactual form then their is no other option than Sai Satcharitra Even though it takes some time to get entry in the book, I myself am saying this But if somebody will truly read 1 chapter daily for 9 months with pure heart I promise you, after nine months, you will have a new birth. But you have to read one chapter daily from the heart Those who are hearing me for the first time, those who are hearing about Sai Satcharitra for the first time, I have one request They say that when a speaker comes, you should give him something as an offering. I don't need any offerings from you. But I have one request, one plea. Please give me one promise. You will not bathe without doing one chapter. You will not eat without doing one chapter. You will not sleep without doing one chapter. One chapter daily. How many of you promise me this? Because whatever I am saying now will make sense to your heart after nine months This Granth is not an ordinary Granth. It's a Granth that will change your life. It's a Granth that will fill you with enlightenment Every person in this world wants happiness and peace. We are always running after instant happiness and peace. But without God's enlightenment, there is no happiness and peace anywhere. Remember this. Without his devotion, without his enlightenment, there is no happiness and peace anywhere And it is not at all present in this illusional world And if you truly want to experience happiness and peace in your life, then read one chapter daily it may take 30 minutes or 40 minutes or 45 minutes for one chapter. But if we can immerse ourselves in that chapter, then after nine months, you will not be the same person you were nine months ago. I guarantee you that. Your life will change. This was the one request and there's one more request There is a prayer from sai satcharitra which I want you to recite from your heart Because that prayer has been given to us by Baba himself in this Granth. So the prayer you should remember by heart and you should recite it with all you heart everyday That prayer is in the 25th chapter. From verse 110 to 121. These are 11 verses See the prayer that comes from our heart will always be ours No matter how nice of a prayer we do there would be some or the other error, it will have some flaw But if the prayer is given by Baba himself, because he wrote this Granth, and if a prayer comes in it, it has an extraordinary value because it's written by himself It is not a human made, It is not somebody's prayer Baba has also taught us how to pray in this granth So this is that prayer So these 11 verses should be imprinted on your heart So please adopt this prayer in your life Include this prayer in your daily routine And whenever you read Sai satcharit If you don't have the focus while reading it happens sometimes that we read four or five lines, but our mind is thinking about something else. Don't do that dishonesty. When you feel that you have missed those four lines, you have to go back and read them again. ou have to be focused and then move forward. Don't just do it to complete the chapter. You have to read it connectedly And while reading wherever a line touches your heart and Baba gives you tears, seize that moment. Stop right there. Close your eyes and for five or ten minutes, let that emotion flow with the name of Baba that is in your heart Don't be in a hurry, because that moment when he gives you tears is a very big moment of reading the Sai Satcharitra. When that depth of any verse touches your heart and tears fall from your eyes, that moment is very important. So don't let that moment slip away easily. Take full advantage of it. Stop there and live that moment. Feel it. Close your eyes and chant Baba's name You should take that name, because at that time, that name will be taken with love and emotio And in this type of name remberance we can add our love and devotion to it Even if we chant Baba's name we chant it in a mechanical way, there is no love no devotion to it But while reading Sai satcharitra our devotion automatically connects with Baba And if something touches you at that moment, then remembering the name becomes very easy. So, this is the way to read the Satcharitra. If the link breaks somewhere in between, don't move forward. Come back again. Focus again and then complete it. If you just finish a chapter somehow just because you were told to do so, you are cheating yourself. Nothing will happen that way. You won't get that joy, that happiness, that peace that you are supposed to experience after reading a chapter. And Baba's business is all about cash. What does he say? \"Give me 40 minutes of your focused attention to my Granth, and I will take care of the rest of your day.\" \"I will take care of your entire day.\" \"You just give me those 40 minutes with complete honesty and focus.\" \"Its effect will last on you all day long.\" That peace, tranquility, focus, If there is such a big benefit of those 40 min, then can't we give 40 min of undidvided attention for one chapter Now you all must be wondering how this person finds so much depth in these leelas and this Satcharitra. This curiosity must have arisen in the minds of many people Those who have seen my videos they would be surely curious about this How could he understand that this depth is hidden in this leela? There's dept in evey leela Baba didn't do any leela without any meaning Okay, so now, does anyone have any doubts about the leela that we discussed today? Does anyone have any doubt about the leela of Bhimaji Patil that I unraveled today? Please, if you have any, ask. You see, many people who meet me often... I am a South Indian. I'm from Andhra. My mother tongue is Telugu. But I was born in Maharashtra, in Ambernath. I grew up with Marathi kids. I was raised with them. So there's a natural love for Marathi. And in my house, my father was a Guru Bhakt. The atmosphere at home was always spiritual. It was as if he had the Bhagavad Gita memorized. There was always a discussion about it in our house. So I knew a lot about the Bhagavad Gita since childhood. I had a desire to understand the depth of the Bhagavad Gita better. And since I was born and raised in this soil of Maharashtra, I got to know about Dnyaneshwar Maharaj, who, at the age of 13, wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad Gita. And at the age of 19 he attains mausolem with co-body and It was a very shocking thing for me I was of a very young age but I was curious so I thought of reading Dyaneshwari Because I used to read Bhagwat gita in childhood So I got curious about reading Dyaneshwari, So I read it And it gave me immense happiness, then all the granths in marathi like eknathi bhagwat, Dasbodh, were read out A lot of reading took place So baba had already created the base of spirituality, and Sai satcharitra came pretty late in my life How did my connection with Sai Baba happen? Let me tell you, it will become clearer. One day, Baba came in my dream and told me, \"Krishna, go to Dadar.\" I didn't even know what was in Dadar. \"Go to Dadar.\"I live in Ambernath. Dadar is at least an hour and 20 minutes away by local train. \"Go to Dadar and bring Rudradhyay.\" I didn't understand I thought about it for two or three days, and then I found out that the 11th chapter of Sai Satcharitra is called Rudradhyay. Now I had a question in my mind. He was asking me to get it in Marathi, and he had given me an order. I was a bit hesitant, thinking if I would be able to read and understand it. Still I though that let's go he has given me an order, let's not delay I woke up early morning and I guess time was 9:30-10:00 . I went to dadar I reached there around 12:30 PM. And I asked them, \"Do you have a Rudradhyay of Sai Satcharitra here?\" He said \"Yes, we have it.It's a small booklet Give one and a quarter rupees and take it\" At that time, it costed one and a quarter rupees I paid them that amount and put the booklet, which fit in my pocket. Then I went to the railway station to start my return journey to Ambernath. It was a small booklet, and I thought I would finish it on the train. So I opened it And as soon as I started reading 11th chapter I started crying , my tears didn't stop By the time I reached Ambernath, I had only read 34 verses. Only 34 verses, and every single one of them made me cry. I was crying because I was understanding every single verse, and tears were rolling down my cheeks. I went home. and my father was not well, so I had to take him to the hospital. But my mind was in two places:I had to take my father to the hospital, and I also had to read the book. because the law was imposed Baba had done some miracle and we returned till evening Then I thought if I sit down now, I'll have to get up in the middle So I sat down at night. I remember it well. I sat down at 10:30 PM to read the 35th verse. By the time I finished the chapter, it was 5:00 AM. So you can imagine. . One chapter, Not even one chapter, I have already raed 34 verses and it took me from 10:30 PM to 5:00 AM to finish the rest of the chapter. What must I have experienced in those seven hours? It was as if Baba was telling me the entire journey of my life. He was unraveling my entire spiritual journey, one stage at a time. So I swear on Baba's feet that I haven't done any research or practice to know this. It's not like that. I read it that night The experience I had was so different. And the next day, Baba didn't have to tell me to go and get the Granth. I ran back to Dadar. I want to read complete Sai satcharitra Then I ran back to Dadar, got the Granth, and started reading one chapter at a time. It took me three to four hours to finish one chapter the first time, and every line touched my heart. The depth of that leela was revealed at that very moment. I understood that Baba was revealing this in this leela, so it was like,this is the line and this is the leela and this is the connection between this line and this leela. Baba is revealing this here. This happened for the very first time when I read Sai Satcharitra. Baba unraveled every single leela inside of me. So my experience has been like this. Many people think that I have read this many times and that I have a lot of practice, and that's why I am able to speak on it. No I swear on Baba's feet that the very first time I read it, it was as if Baba opened up every leela in front of me, and I was in tears every time. So this is my experince in life Yes but now as I do satsang then I have to tell recite leela a lot of times, which is a different thing. But the first time I read it, he opened up all those leelas. So Sai Satcharitra is like this for me. And the reason for that is that before I read Sai Satcharitra, I had already read Dnyaneshwari, Eknathi Bhagavat, and other Granths. So it was very easy for me to read and understand the depth of Satcharitra. Because I will say again that many verses from Dnyaneshwari has descended into satcharitra by Himadpanth. If you look at Dnyaneshwari and Eknathi Bhagavat, you will understand. That's why today, you don't need to read Eknathi Bhagavat separately. You don't need to read Dnyaneshwari separately. One Sai satcharitra is enough. Everything is in here. It has the entire Vedanta, the Upanishads, Eknathi bhagwat, Dyaneshwari and everything. You don't need to read any other Granth separately. This is a complete Granth. Baba says to shama in 37th chapter that,\"When I leave my body and go to my abode, my Granth will stand in front of the world as my replica. It will be my living form.\" \" So this Granth is that 8-year-old child. When you hold it in your hands, you should have so much faith and respect that you feel like you are sitting right in front of Baba. You are going to spend the next 40 minutes with him. Then you will get the real joy and happiness. You shouldn't feel like you are just holding a book. You should feel that Baba himself is going to sit with you for 40 minutes. This Granth is so alive. It pours out so much emotion. It makes you cry. Only one thing should be present in you and that is \"Focus\" You just have to get a feeling for it and read it with all your heart You just imagine if it took me seven hours to read it. What must he have given me in those seven hours? And what I am unraveling in front of you today... and let me tell you one more thing, one more experience from this Sai Satcharitra. It will give you more clarity about me. This granth came into my hands and I started reading this Granth. For some years, I used to visit Shirdi. In those days, I never spoke to anyone. I would stay in Shirdi for a month and then leave. Then, on the day of Sankranti in 2000, I had a dream. There was a gathering. The ladies were sitting on one side, and men on the other side Baba was standing on a stage. He was saying something, and I was sitting just like you are sitting now, but I was at the very back, And I couldn't hear Baba's voice. I was feeling bad that I was sitting so far back, and I couldn't hear what Baba was saying. And Baba saw my pain while standing on the stage. And he walked very fast through the passage in between through the crowd and came to me. It was a dream. And he said, \"Take this. It's enough now. Now come out.\" \" These were the words. \"It's enough now. Come out and distribute these\" And he put Udi in my hand. And after taking the Udi, I was thinking whom should I distribute this Udi to? He said this much and Baba vanished and even the gathering has vanished , and now all I am left with is Udi And then I thought let's put the Udi in a plate which was there beside me and then let's pack it in something. And then I will think about amongst whom and howshould I distribute But as soon as I put the Udi in the plate I see a coin slightly shinning in it So I picked up that coin and looked at it. It was a gold coin. Then I thought \"Are there more coins in it?\", So I started sifting the Udi and then I found six more coins one by one In total I got 7 coins And the dream ended Now the question in my mind was What was that dream? What did Baba want to explain to me? What exactly to distribute the Udi or the coins? And whom to distribute? He didn't even tell me anything I thought alott on it but I didn't get the answer's But before this, I never used to talk to anyone. I never made any friends. I would go to Shirdi and do my meditation in silence. I would stay there for months and then go back home. After that dream,people started connecting with me in Shirdi slowly slowly. First, there was a group of professors from Delhi. We started talking. I started speaking about Baba's Granths. Then a group of people from Andhra started coming. I would sit with them and talk. And slowly, a year passed. After that, he made it clear to me that these were the precious coins of depth of Sai Satcharitra. These were what I had to distribute to the world. This is what Baba told me \"Come out and distribute\" So whatever I am today, it's because of his coins, which I am distributing to you all. That's all I can say And it was very important to share this experience. Because unless that clarity comes, faith doesn't come. I swear on Baba's feet that I had so many satsang groups, but I never shared my life experiences before. But in recent times, he grabbed me by the throat and said, \"Share your life experiences.\" Now recently I have started sharing my life experience, if any such occassion arises but until now, I felt that talking about oneself is very cheap. But after that, as the poetry says\"I started out alone without knowing the destination but people kept meeting me and a caravan kept forming\" Something like that happened. Slowly slowly people started connecting and the real depth of sai satcharitra has been started to open up Slowly, a YouTube channel was created, and I came in front of you all through it. Today, whatever you all have seen, to be very honest, When I came down, Mr.Amey Kalekar was saying, \"Thank you very much for coming.\" I would thank you instead. I would thank you for wanting to listen. You have done me a favor by calling me here, not me by coming because the longing of my heart today is that the truth about Baba, the original Baba, should reach the world. There are so many fake Babas out there that there's no limit. And now, the original Baba should come out in front of the world. First of all, I sincerely thank you all for giving me this opportunity to put the truth about Baba in front of you. And I'm not a fake person. I don't pretend. I will say what is true, whether you like it or not. But I will only present the truth. There will be no compromise on that. I won't speak to please you. I will open up Baba's heart and soul in front of you. If you have faith and enlightenment, you will accept it from your heart. And if not, then it's your bad luck. I will only say that much. But I will only present the truth. And today, when I look at social media, there are two types of people who make videos about Baba. One group is against Baba, and they are promoting Baba in a very wrong wa And the second group loves Baba immensely, but they only give information. They don't reach Baba's heart. They don't reach Baba's soul. There are two kinds of people who are famous on social media. They have a lot of information. And they mistake that information for knowledge. But information is just information. It's like chewing gum and spitting it out. And enlightenment is like eating almonds and walnuts. That's what I would say. It gives strength to your body. That is the power of enlightenment So there's a world of difference. Yes, Please Sai Baba's birthplace is Pathri. It has been published recently. What are your thoughts on it? Okay, okay... I have already released a video on this entire topic On this complete topic,on sai hridgat youtube channel The title is \"Why question Sai Baba's birth?\" What answer should I give from my side?What answer Baba had given, infact Baba himself gave the answer I'll put that answer in front of you. Please open chapter four, verse number 124 The people of Shirdi wanted to know about Baba. They wanted to know where this boy came from. Just like you are asking where his birthplace is. Even when Baba was alive, people were after him to find out where he came from, who his parents were, and what his lineage was. In verse number 113, it says, In which country, which righteous family, or in which parental adobe, Baba took birth, this no one knew No one knew his antedecedents- who was his father, or who his mother? All were exhausted asking him questions, but were none wiser for all that This is a very important line It says that when Baba was alive everyone was fed up asking these questions but Baba didn't answer. We have to understand that Baba diodn't answer. and then it is said as \"Abandoning mother and father, friends and relations, caste and descent- in fact, renouncing the whole wordly life, he appeared in Shridi for the benefit of the people\" Now you tell me one thing When Baba was alive He was already their all alive and people were tired of asking them these questions but Baba didn't tell anybody his birthplace If we believe Baba is our Sadhguru, then if Baba decided not to tell us something then the topic is over there. No further questions If I am Baba's true disciple, If I am a real devotee of Baba then why should I use my ego and my own intelligence to search for something that my Baba didn't find appropriate to tell? The matter is settled there. Why would I go against his will and try to find out his birthplace? Then people from Andhra will say he was born here. People from Maharashtra will say he was born here. Some will say he was born in Pathri. What I am saying is, if they got tired of asking, and no one got the answer, if Baba didn't tell them, then the matter is closed there. He didn't want to tell them, so he didn't. And the one whose house is this entire universe, the one whose presence is in all moving and non-moving things, why would you tie him down to a single village or a single house? And what's the fun in that? It's like going against Baba. We are going against his will, right? If we are even investigating his birthplace, we are going against his will, right? So how can we be true devotees? He didn't find it appropriate to tell, so he didn't. And the matter is closed there. t's that simple. If he is truly my true Guru, then respecting his will is my birthright. It's my duty.If I am truly his disciple, if I am truly his devotee, and he didn't find it appropriate to tell, then the matter is closed there. Besides, the place of work is a million times more important than the birthplace. And Shirdi is Baba's place of work. The nectar-like words that came from Baba's mouth, they came from the holy land of Shirdi. The divine conduct of Baba was seen on the holy land of Shirdi. The teachings of Baba were given on the holy land of Shirdi, from Dwarkamai. So the place from which we received the enlightenment holds great value. \"Don't ask a saint's caste, ask for his knowledge. Judge the sword by its sharpness, not by its sheath.\" He didn't find it appropriate to tell us where he was born, who his parents were.So the matter is closed. So how much od ego is that of ours that we will go against his will and find his birthplace. Is it more important than Baba? The matter is closed there. Can't we have this much faith in Baba? Can't we understand Baba's heart this much? Then how can we be true devotees? What kind of ego is this that we go against his will and write something and say something? And besides, he is omnipresent. But we are so interested in this kind of information. We don't want to go beyond information. This informative knowledge is so dangerous. That's why I am always against it. Okay, I accept. Let's say he was born in Pathri. So what will you do? What will you do with that information? What will you achieve? Let me tell you a small story. It will make things clearer. Everyone must know about Gondvalekar Maharaj. Gondavlekar Maharaj had a disciple. He served Maharaj for 12 years. He would always heat water for him, bathe him, cook for him, and take care of him in every way. Once a farmer from a village comes to meet Maharaj at the ashram in gondhval as soon as he see's Maharaj his eyes become teary and he starts crying He is a normal farmer After seeing him Maharaj says \"You have no idea how happy I am seeing you in this state , Go you don't need to come here again your work is done.\" and the disciple who served Maharaj for 12 years heard this, what all Maharaj said to the farmer So the disciple's heart shatter's The disciple thinks\" I am serving him for past 12 years but Maharaj didn.t say this for me but this farmer came and went once in a while and Maharaj showed so much love for him and said Go your work is done no need to come again \" He couldn't stand it, so he asked Maharaj, \"Maharaj, why this discrimination?\" So Gondvalekar Maharaj said,\"Even when he was far away, he was still close to my heart, but you were never that close to my heart, even after being so close me. He knows my will very well\" \"He knows what I want, what my expectations are from him. He changes himself accordingly.\" \"But you serve me according to your will.\" \"You never do what I want you to do.\" \"And you think you are serving me?\" So this is the power of guru's will. So if Baba has said that he doesn't want to tell us about his birthplace, and the villagers got tired of asking, then it was not his will, right? So it's not his will. The matter is closed. And another thing: worshipping him and having devotion for him according to our will is one thing, and understanding his will and changing ourselves accordingly is another thing. And if we truly want to know his will, then we have no other option than the Sai Satcharitra. So if we want to understand the original Baba, by original, I don't mean that Baba is fake. But still, his original essence can be only possible through sai satcharitra. And today, Baba is truly being presented in a fake way. And every day, I see it. It's just about miracles and leelas. But the longing of Baba's heart, what his expectations are from us, he also expects something from me. He also wants something from me. But we have a lot of our own things. We have our list of demands. We go in front of Baba with our lists, but what his will is, what he expects from us, we don't think about that for even a moment And if we truly want to know his will, then Sai Satcharitra is the only option. And the more we know his will, the closer we will get to him. And the closer we get to him, the more we will experience peace and happiness. That happiness and peace will become our right. And until we know Baba's heart and change our behavior accordingly, we are just devotees of Bab namesake. We are connected to Baba, but we are not still connected yet. Let me take one more leela, it will become clearer. Everyone must have read the 32nd chapter. Baba is set out to find his guru with three companions Everybody must have read it All three of them are experts in their own ways. They have read the Vedas. They have knowledge. One says that controlling the mind is everything. The other says that one should have constant wisdom. And Baba says, what will happen with just bookish knowledge? Until you find a Guru and take refuge in him, we cannot progress. So everyone goes in search of the knowledge of the Supreme Soul with their own ideas. Why am I telling you this story? Because his will is very important. So they start to search. They meet a nomadic man who asks them, \"Where are you all going?\" \"What are you searching for?\" They think, \"We are on such a high quest, the quest for the knowledge of the Supreme Soul.\" \"This is just a simple nomad. What will he understand?\" They don't tell him. Baba is also with them at that time. They move forward. They are in a forest and the forest is so dense that not a single ray of sun can enter it They keep wandering around, like in a circle, and they come back to the nomad again where he was standing. When we live according to our own will, our spiritual practice, our running, our devotion is just like those four people who are wandering in the forest. They haven't found a Guru yet. They don't understand the Guru's will. They are living according to their own will. So it's like wandering in a circle. Our situation is also the same. We are also worshipping Baba, but we are just like those four people who are wandering in a circle. So we are going to end up in the same place again. And all the effort we have made by walking this far will be wasted. So in the end, the nomad asks them, \"Oh, it's okay, gentlemen. Your ego has fallen now If you still don't want to tell me what you are looking for, don't tell me. But at least it's afternoon. Eat some bread, drink some water, and then leave\" At this, Baba's heart melts. Baba feels, \"What is this man's self-interest in this?\" If someone can have such selfless love in their heart, he cannot be an ordinary person. He is feeling my hunger. He is feeling my thirst. So I should listen to what this man says. So Baba stays there but the other three thinks \"where we are getting caught up in this\", infact they think that wherever we go this nomand is coming ,they take it with that perspective so they move forward and as per written in sai satcharitra the story continues as that the nomad offers Baba a piece of bread and Baba have that piece of bread and as they are drinking water, the Guru appears. It's like that, right? The question is, the Guru appears... does it mean that some Baba with a beard and mustache appeared? And the nomad disappeared? Or did the nomad stay there, and another man appeared as the Guru? Or did Baba already have a Guru? Because he didn't. The chapter says that all four of them, including Baba, went in search of the Supreme Soul's knowledge on their own. So what does the leela say? That as long as we were living according to our own will, he was just a simple nomad. But as soon as he said, \"Eat this bread and drink some water,\" as soon as his will was accepted, as soon as they listened to him, ate that bread, and drank water, that same nomad became the true Guru. So today, the statue of Baba in the Samadhi Mandir in Shirdi, is he a nomad for us, or is he the true Guru? Everyone should decide for themselves. As long as we don't understand his will and practice devotion according to our own will, we are just wandering in the forest. But now, if we start to understand his will, and the leelas start to unravel, we are getting closer to his heart, and we are changing ourselves then he is our true Guru. Otherwise, remember, he is no more than a nomad. It means our own faith will either make him an ordinary nomad or the leader of the universe, the true Guru. That is our faith only. If we live by his will, then he is sacchidanand sadguru sainath, then he is he leader of the universe And if we live according to our own will without knowing his will, and if we worship him according to our will, then that leader of universe is no motre than a nomad for you. Nobody Even though he is the leader of the universe, you have made him a simple nomad. So from today, we have to decide whether we want to keep him as a simple nomad or make him the leader of the universe and place him in our hearts and live by his will. We have to decide. So these leelas are not as simple as they seem. Every leela leaves some enlightenment and some depth. If we chant the slogan \"Sacchidananda Sadguru Sainath Maharaj Ki Jai,\" we have the right to do so only on the day we understand his will. When we are ready to live by his will, when we know and understand his will, and we have the courage to change ourselves accordingly, only then will he be our true Guru. Otherwise, we are just going on a pilgrimage to Shirdi, but we are only seeing a nomad. These are bitter words, but you have to listen. We have no other option. We have to decide whether we want to keep him as a simple nomad or make him the leader of the universe and place him in our hearts. From today, our thoughts will decide this. Okay so anybody has any questions on these leela's so please ask. It's clear right whatever I'm saying. Is it touching your heart I will tell Amey Kalekar again that I haven't done you a favor by coming here. You all have done me a favor. Because my longing is so strong. When I look at social media and read other books about Baba, I feel so sad that diamonds and pearls are scattered all around, but we are wandering somewhere else. It's just information, just information. This leela, that leela, this miracle. . Baba keeps performing them in someone's life or the other. How much will you listen? Don't you get bored with it? But when will we know his will? It's enough. We have wandered in the forest enough. Now let's hold his hand and ask him to lead us. And holding his hand means holding sai satcharitra, understanding the depth of the Satcharitra, understanding every word. And I have a request , Amey for you too. There is a feeling in my heart that there should be a discourse on all 53 chapters of the Sai Satcharitra. It's an attempt to start a campaign. We will have a three-day camp in Shirdi. In the first three days, we will cover 20 to 22 chapters, and then in another three days rest of chapters. In the spam of such 3 days 3 times, we will open up the entire Granth. And I need your support. On this holy land, I want this original thing to come in front of the world. And if I get your support, especially from the youngsters, I want every youngster to join this movement If we can get the names of 40 to 50 interested people from every group, and make sure they reach till us then they become 400, 500, or 600 people but after two to three months we will conduct a camp. In that camp, every leela of every chapter will be opened up, and I want you all to not miss it. I guarantee you that those three days will be among the best days of your life. Those days will not come back. Those three days that you give me will be one of the best days of your life. I guarantee it. So I request you with folded hands. Bring as many youngsters as you can.It's a good thing, an original thing. It should come in front of the world. I have to spread the coins that Baba has given me all over the universe, and it will not happen without your help. Please. It's a humble request. Please prepare yourselves. I will say it again: I have not done you a favor by coming here. You all have done me a favor. And I request you to do this favor again: spread this message of the original Baba to every corner of the world. Please. Because lies have spread so much that it's painful. So many lies have spread in Baba's name that there is no limit. Baba himself says,\"This world is a fair of illusions, there are many fake and real things.\" what he says \"this world is a market of illusions there are many fake and real things,there are many customers who buy fake products by passing off as real ones \" So this is the condition. So the difference between fake and real should come in front of the world, and Baba's real form should come in front of the world. Baba is not a miracle man; he is a true Guru. The longing of his heart should reach every heart in the world. And that's not possible without your support. People like you, the more you support, the more successful that three-day camp will be. In three days, let's say we do 20 chapters, but the depth of every chapter will be unraveled. And Baba's real form will be in front of us. I promise you again, those three days will be one of the best days of your life that you will give me. So I request you to take a leave and definitely come for those three days. Take holidays and do come for those three days Okay, now we can have a question-answer session. If anyone wants to ask anything else, please. Yes, Jai Sai Ram. I'll tell you today's sessions's miracle through my experience. I was sitting in the back, at the very end. As you were talking, I got some information. You repeated two things: information and knowledge. There are people who run after information, nobody knows true knowledge and there is no need for it. And today for the first time we realised we are stuck up in information only Today I realised what true knowledge is And true knowledge is not very huge, he has answered that also I tried to ask you question three times and all three times you were answering the question without asking only when last time you saw time I felt I should share this that's why I came till here I also feel that there is too much information, and there are many fake people. And these fake people are getting a lot of fame. I feel this is wrong. What I feel is if Baba is doing miracle, then these people should stop showing fake things It will happen with you support This is our fault also that if people are telling fake things then there are more people who are listening to these fake things This is our fault And for the first time, I have realized this mistake. We say many things that I am a Sai Bhakt. But I have never done devotion according to Baba's will. So I got that knowledge today. And this is my biggest achievement. And I thank you very much. I will try to connect with you whenever I get a chance after this. Please, give them Om sai ram Now as you said that we need to find the Baba in our hearts As you know this is kaliyg . You know that every human being is suffering and in pain So I request you to share some knowledge from your experience, some way to reach Baba's heart. Ofcourse raeding sai satcharitra is the main thing, but as the language is told it is a little hard to understand We take help of the book written by nimbalkar to understand. Whenerver we read we try read it with understanding So please tell some way that we could implement in our routine so any sai bhakt could reach more near to Baba's heart. okay! thank you Baba has done that same thing. The subject of Vedanta is very profound, with the addition of devotion and knowledge. Creation of such granth is not possible without Guru's grace. He made that profound subject so simple and presented it to the world through these leelas. So I am telling you the same thing, that when those leelas are unraveled, and when they open up... when I talk about the camp that we will have... Mr. Sandesh is also here, and I expect his help as well. If we can have this in Shirdi, and if every leela is unraveled,even if you don't read charitra it will be recorded. The depth behind every leela... if you just watch that, it will reach your heart. It will be very easy. Every leela, every chapter will be unraveled, and it will be done in a very simple way. For example, today I talked about the 32nd chapter. Will you be able to forget it? Tell me. You won't forget till your last breath so that is it's importance after opening up You will never forget that leela Now whenever you step into shirdi, in smadhi mandir is the person in the Samadhi Mandir a nomad or the true Guru? So this is what happens when it opens up. It takes a permanent place in our memory. I challenge you to forget this leela. You can't Forget it and tell me you forgot You won't be able to You try to forget bhimaji patil leela You can't forget till your last breath So when the leela opens up with experience, this is it's So this is it's destination Baba has talked about the depths of the Upanishads and the Vedas. It's very profound. So Baba has made it very simple and presented it to us through the leelas. And I am trying to open them up, and that too with his enlightenment. I have got his permission, and that's why this is happening I am just an instrument. He is the one who is speaking through my mouth. I challenge you that you will not be able to question what I am saying. This is the ultimate truth. Don't consider it my ego. I am telling the truth that this is the ultimate truth. There can be no alternative to this. And this is final So from today onwards is Sai Baba a nomad or sadguru? This question will arise. And you are the one to make him nomad, and you only can make him sadguru You have the string of decision Keep him as a nomad like you have done till now or make him the leader of universe It will depend on your thought process from today onwards So do you see a nomad in the Samadhi Mandir, or the leader of the universe, the true Guru?",
    "Description": "॥ॐ श्री साईनाथाय नमः ॥\nशिर्डी में होनेवाले इस तीन दिवसीय सत्संग मे शामील होने के लिए निचे दि हुई लिंक पर अपना नाम रजिस्टर करे. https://forms.gle/hm8gSSDwa3z6tBUq6\n\n॥ॐ श्री साईनाथाय नमः ॥\nशिर्डी येथील तीन दिवसीय सत्संगात सहभागी होण्यासाठी  खाली दिलेल्या लिंकवर आपले नाव रजिस्टर करा. https://forms.gle/hm8gSSDwa3z6tBUq6\n\nRegister your name on the link given below to attend the 3 days satsang in Shirdi https://forms.gle/hm8gSSDwa3z6tBUq6\n\n\n#sai  #saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba #saisatsanghintamil #saisatsang #satsang #livesatsangkathamrut #satsanglive …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, sai, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, sai songs, saiwani, sai baba songs, miracles, saibaba miracles, chamatkar, sai satsang, live satsang, santsang live, samagam live",
    "Views": "76,817 views",
    "Likes": "1,305"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Shirdi Parikrama (Sthul se Sukshma) | Shirdi Parikrama 2023 | 13 Feb 2023 | शिर्डी परिक्रमा",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q431NlwhND0",
    "Transcript": "[संगीत] ओम साइन राम सभी साइन भक्तों के चरणों में कोटि-कोटि वंदन [संगीत] जैसे हम सब जानते हैं की फरवरी 13th को शिरडी में शिरडी परिक्रमा का आयोजन किया गया है जो शिरडी साइन बाबा संस्थान और ग्राम मिलकर के उपक्रम को करीबन पिछले 4 साल से चला रहे हैं भक्त इसमें शामिल होते हैं और उसे परिक्रमा का उसे उत्सव का सौभाग्य प्राप्त करते हैं तो परिक्रमा पर मैं कुछ भी कहूं उससे पहले लेता हूं फिर शायद हम वो सब्जेक्ट में शिरकत कर पाएंगे जिसमें बाबा कहते हैं पाषाण अन्य से जया अनुदिन ghadalebaba चल जिसका मैन है शिरडी के घास के तिनके और पाषाण मतलब पत्थर जिसको अनायास हर दिन बाबा का चरण चुंबन का प्राप्ति होती है और बाबा का चरण राजकुमार और फिर आगे कहते हैं श्री समाहा पंढरपुर शिरडी जगन्नाथ द्वारका नगर शिरडी गया काशी विश्वेश्वर रामेश्वर ही शिरडी हमारे लिए तो पंढरपुर जगन्नाथ द्वारका नगर गया काशी विश्वेश्वर रामेश्वर भी शिरडी नाशिक त्रंबकेश्वर शिरडी महाकालेश्वर महाबलेश्वर गोकर्ण हमारे लिए शिरडी ही नाशिक त्रंबकेश्वर है हमारे लिए शिरडी महाकालेश्वर है और महाबलेश्वर गोकर्ण भी शिरडी श्री signcha समागम निगम शकल संसार वो पसंद अत्यंत सुगम परमार शिरडी में जो साइन का समागम है वही हमारे लिए आगम निगम है वही हमारे लिए वेदांत और शास्त्र पुराण है और वही संसार का सारा ऑप्शन संसार का सारा व्याप को शांत करने वाला है और अत्यंत सुगम परमार्थ मतलब बहुत ही सुगंधा से जो परमत की तरफ ले जाए वो है हमारे लिए शिरडी तो शिरडी की व्याख्या इमारत इमारत नहीं बल्कि मैं तो कहूंगा बाबा ही कर रहे हैं तो शिरडी की महानता इन रोमन में जो बताया गया है किस संसार के जितने भी mahapurniman क्षेत्र है वह सारे नगरी में ही बसते हैं साइन बाबा के भक्तों के लिए तो अगर यह मकान है शिरडी का यह मकाम है उसे पवन भूमि का यह मकाम है उसे खाबो हवा का जहां बाबा ने 60 साल अपना सांस लिया अपना प्राण फुका वो धरती को पवन किया अपनी जीवनी से अपने गुना से अपने कर्म से और अपने जीवन की गहराई से तो वो पवन भूमि की परिक्रमा होने जा रही है ये तेरा फरवरी को तो मेरी सभी साइन भक्तों से हृदय पूर्वक निवेदन है की वह जितनी संख्या में हो सके वह श्री आए और इस उपक्रम का सहभागी होकर भाग्य का धनी बने जिस धारा पर जिस भूमि पर बाबा ने अवतार धारण किया अपने दिव्या लीलाएं की जीवन को रोशनी दी उसे भूमि की परिक्रमा तो वह paritrama का महत्व कितना असाधारण होगा अब यह अलग से कहने की जरूरत नहीं बस यह जितनी भी मूवी धारण करके मौन रखकर के बाबा का नाम स्मरण करते हुए भक्ति विभोर होकर के अगर वो परिक्रमा हम कर पाएंगे तो बाबा के कृपा के पत्र बनेंगे तो यह हो गया स्तन परिक्रमा लेकिन कोई भी साधना होता है परिक्रमा हो पदयात्रा हो कोई उपासना हो हमेशा से ही स्कूल से शुरुआत होती है लेकिन उसका अंत हमेशा सूक्ष्म पर ही होता है तो यह परिक्रमा हुई जिसकी चर्चा आज हर साइन भक्त के हृदय में हैं वैसी parikramaayen होनी भी चाहिए लेकिन उसका जो एक आंतरिक अर्थ है जो सूक्ष्म अर्थ है परिक्रमा का वह भी हम जब तक नहीं जानेंगे तो परिक्रमा की गहराई हमारी चेतना में नहीं उतरेगी तो मैं चाहता हूं की थोड़ा सा मैं परिक्रमा की वह जो सूक्ष्म अर्थ आजकल परिक्रमा बोलते हैं कहीं parikramaon की बातें हमारी जहां में आती हैं नर्मदा परिक्रमा गोवर्धन परिक्रमा गिरनार परिक्रमा वृंदावन परिक्रमा तो आज यह सारी parikramaayen बड़े श्रद्धा से सारे भक्तगण करते हैं और यह परिक्रमा को अगर हम इसकी गहराई नहीं समझेंगे या जानेंगे तो शायद वो लाभ हम नहीं उठा पाएंगे जितना लाभ हम उठा सकेंगे है तो एक तो स्थूल परिक्रमा यह है की मैं वह क्षेत्र का वह punyatirth का वह मंदिर का वह विग्रह शरीर से चारों ओर एक सर्कल सा एक वृत्त में मैं परिक्रमा कर दूंगा तो यह है परिक्रमा का मतलब सेंटर में कोई तीरथ होगा कोई नदी होगी या कोई मंदिर होगा या कोई विग्रह होगा और उसके सरकम्फ्रेंसेस में पुरी सर्कल में जो हम लोग चक्कर लगाते हैं उसको हम नॉर्मली परिक्रमा कहते हैं यह तो हो गया अब sukshmrit क्या है परिक्रमा का मैं जो भी कर्तव्य करता रहूं मेरे जीवन में मैं जो भी कार्य करता रहूं हो सकता है मैं अपनी पारिवारिक जिम्मेदारी निभा रहा हूं हो सकता है मैं अपना सामाजिक जिम्मेदारी निभा रहा हूं हो सकता है मैं अपना वैयक्तिक जीवन निभा रहा हूं तो जितनी भी मतलब maryadaen हैं कर्तव्य हैं मैं उसको पुरी तरह से निभा मैं बच्चों का भरण पोषण करूं मैं बच्चों को अच्छे से अच्छी शिक्षा डन यह मेरी जिम्मेदारी है यह मेरा कर्तव्य है और मैं उनको एक बेहतरीन नागरिक बना करके संसार के सामने पेश करूं लेकिन यह कर्तव्य निभाते हुए अगर मेरे चित में हमेशा साइन बना रहे उनका चिंतन बना रहे तो वह सही परिक्रमा मतलब मैं संसार के हर कर्तव्य को निभाता रहूं लेकिन मेरे चित में साइन बेस रहेंगे मैं एक पाल के लिए भी साइन को विष्णु ना भूलना तो जिस दिन मेरी चेतना antrmukh हो करके इस तरह इस चेतना के अवस्था पर पहुंच जाएगी तो वो है सूक्ष्म परिक्रमा संसार का हर कर्तव्य हर जिम्मेदारी को निभाता रहूं जो की मेरा कर्तव्य है मेरे परिवार के प्रति समाज के प्रति देश के प्रति हर कर्तव्य को निभाता रहा हूं लेकिन मेरे चित्त में मेरे मैन में हर पाल साइन बसता रहे उनका चिंतन चलता रहे वो एक पाल के लिए भी मेरे मैन से मेरे चित से उतरे ना जिस दिन मेरी चेतना इस अवस्था पे पहुंच जाती हैं की फिर मैं एक तरह से सूक्ष्म परिक्रमा कर रहा हूं बाबा का वो है सूक्ष्म परिक्रमा क्योंकि बाबा एक जगह बोलते हैं अध्याय 10 कोई नंबर 129 को बोलते हैं prapanchala सपा चित शाही चरनी samarpatayachi ही कृपा तो उन्होंने क्लियर कहा है की ये शरीर को है ना प्रपंच में लगा दो प्रपंच के जिम्मेदारियां में लगा दो कार्य कल्पना में लगा दो जो भी जिम्मेदारियां हैं जो भी कर्तव्य है उसको पूरा करो संसार से भागने का नाम नहीं है परमार्थ दरबार छोड़ कर के भागने का नाम नहीं है परमार्थ तो उन्होंने क्लियर कहा है की यह prapanchala सपा मतलब ये शरीर को प्रपंच में लगा दो और चित जो है ना मैन जो है ना वो हमेशा लगा रहे मर्द एक ही सुगम और असम तरीका है सच्ची भक्ति करने का सच्ची परिक्रमा का एक मराठी भक्ति गीत है फेमस हम सब जानते हैं तुझे रूप चिट्टी रहो मुखी तुझे नाम देह प्रपंच दास सूखे करो कम तो यह गीत [संगीत] जो है ना यह प्रपंच का दास है तो उसको उसे दस्त में लगा दो लेकिन तुझे रूप चिट्टी रहो लेकिन तुम्हारा जो स्वरूप है वह मेरे चित में हमेशा बसा रहे और मुख में हमेशा आपका नाम रहे और इन हाथों से जो कर्तव्य होने हैं वह होता रहे अभिराम चलता रहे वो कर्तव्य लेकिन मैन में एक पाल के लिए भी आपको बुलाओ ना बाबा है तो यह है सूक्ष्म परिक्रमा तो जब तक वह स्कूल परिक्रमा जो हम लोग कर रहे हैं शारीरिक तौर पे वो स्टूल से यह सूक्ष्म तक अगर वो यात्रा नहीं होती हैं तो परिक्रमा अधूरी मणि जाएगी अब सवाल उठ सकता है कोई भी व्यक्ति हो यह सवाल उठेगा ही की संसार का हर कार्य हर जिम्मेदारी हर दायित्व को निभाते हुए चित्त में 24 घंटा बाबा को बसाया रखना आसान है क्या किसके भी मैन में यह सवाल ए सकता है और यह सवाल बेबुनियाद भी नहीं है मैं ऐसा कहूंगा लेकिन मैं यह सवाल का आंसर देते हुए एग्जांपल आपके सामने रखूंगा फिर आप स्वयं डिसाइड कर लेना यह पॉसिबल है या नहीं अभी समझो एक लड़का या एक लड़की अभी किशोरावस्था से थोड़ी सी ऊपर उठकर के जवानी के दहलीज पे कदम रखा है और उसे लड़की या उसे लड़के को किसी लड़की या लड़के से प्रेम हो जाता है है और वह उसके प्रेम में पद जाता है और वह प्रेम उसके चित्त में इस तरह से बसा हुआ है वो प्रेमी या प्रेमिका का की वो एक पाल के लिए नहीं भुला पता उसको घर के हर कम करता है या घर के हर कम करती है बड़े जो-जो भी बात कहते हैं वो सब सुनते हैं और उल्टा ज्यादा दिल से सुनते हैं क्योंकि मैन में किसी के प्रति प्रेम बसा हुआ है तो हर कम हर किसी का पुरी तरह से निभाते हैं लेकिन एक पाल के लिए भी वो लड़की और लड़के के चित्रा से उनका प्रेम उतरता नहीं है तो अगर वह संभव है [संगीत] वैसा प्रेम करना तो बाबा को भी संसार के हर कर्तव्य को निभाते हुए दिल में बसाए रखना संभव है बस जैसे की भागवत गीता कहती हैं अभ्यास और बैरागी की जरूरत है एक अभ्यास और वैराग्य अगर हमारे जीवन में ए जाए तो हमारे चित्त में भी बाबा उसी तरह से बेस रहेंगे जैसे वो प्रेमी या प्रेमिका के हृदय में वो प्रेमी या प्रेमिका बस्ती हैं और अभिराम उसके चिंतन में समय बिताता है संसार का हर कर्तव्य निभाते हुए उसी तरह से हम भी बाबा का अनन्या भक्ति में हम शराब और होंगे लेकिन संसार का कोई कर्तव्य हमसे नहीं छूटेगा तो जिस दिन हमारी चेतना उसे एक लिस्ट भक्ति पर पहुंच जाएगी तो उसे दिन सही मैनो में हम सूक्ष्म परिक्रमा कर रहे हैं सम्मान के चलना होगा तो कोई शुरू होती हैं और सूक्ष्म पर ही खत्म होती हैं तो स्कूल परिक्रमा से सूक्ष्म प्रीतम तक अगर कोई यात्रा है तो मैं ऐसा कहूंगा बस यही यात्रा है और इस पूरे जो परिक्रमा की गहराई है उसे पे बाबा का एक और वो भी है उसे पर मैं खत्म करना चाहूंगा और वो भी है थर्ड अध्याय का 185 बाबा कहते हैं [संगीत] अगर समझो एक लॉबी इंसान है एक कंजूस इंसान है वह चाहे संसार में किधर भी उसका कम निकले और वो किधर भी जाए संसार के किसी भी कोने में जाए चित्त samorpur लेना देवा अगर उसने कहीं पे धन धाड़ के रखता है सोने-चांदी हीरे मोती के सिक्के गार्ड के जमीन में रखा है किसी को ना पता चलते हो गए तो बोले चिंता samurpur लेना देवा लेकिन उसके चिंतन में उसके ध्यान में हमेशा वो गडा हुआ धन जैसा उसके चित में बसा रहता है जैसा tayaasi हरीश निशा आभा जैसे उसको रात और दिन उसका चिंतन में मांग में रहता है वह गडा हुआ धन के प्रति taisachi वसावा शाही मणि तो बोल रहे हैं वैसा ही बाबा को अपने हृदय में धारण करो परिक्रमा का मतलब है की मैं एक सर्कल में घूमता रहा हूं और सेंटर ऑफ अट्रैक्शन जो है मेरे लिए मेरे बाबा होंगे मैं संसार का हर दायित्व पूरा करूं मैं कोई भी एंगल से देखो तो मुझे बाबा दिखाई देना चाहिए मेरा सेंटर ऑफ अट्रैक्शन जो है मेरे बाबा होना चाहिए तो वो है परिक्रमा 360 डिग्री में किधर भी जाऊं तो वहां से मुझे बाबा ही दिखाना चाहिए तो वो है सर्कल में घूमना वो है प्रोडक्शन करना वो है परिक्रमा करना इसका मतलब सिर्फ इतना ही है की संसार का हर कर्तव्य निभाता रहूं लेकिन चित्त में मेरे बाबा बेस रहे है तो मैं इस कामना के साथ की 13 तारीख को जो श्री में परिक्रमा हो रही है वह parikramastu से सूक्ष्म परिक्रमा तक बाबा एक दिन हम सबको ले जाएंगे इस प्रार्थना के साथ मैं अपनी वाणी को विश्राम देता हूं जय साइन राम [संगीत]",
    "Description": "Shirdi Parikrama (Sthul se Sukshma) | शिर्डी परिक्रमा  |Shirdi Parikrama 2023 | Parikrama 13 Feb 2023 | १३ फेब्रुवारी २०२३ स्थूल से सूक्ष्म\n\n#sai  #saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, sai, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, sai songs, saiwani, sai baba songs, miracles, saibaba miracles, chamatkar",
    "Views": "18,295 views",
    "Likes": "252"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Why Baba got gopalkala celebrated in shirdi on the very next day of ram Navami?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CzBIYAx4vS4&pp=0gcJCSMKAYcqIYzv",
    "Transcript": "Unless the journey of a person reaches to the stage of ram he cannot reach to the pedestal of Krishna because only Krishna can be reached by passing through ram if ram is the foundation then Krishna is the mansion ram is childhood then Krishna is youthfulness om sai ram chapter 6 from Sai Satcharitra is very important because Baba presents direct proof of messages like the one is a master of all and respect for all religions as urus and ramnavmi were celebrated on the same day in shirdi so on that day when the kirtan was going on and as it ended, the cradle for ram was being taken down as per the tradition but Baba resisted ferociously, \"until gopalkala is celebrated the festival could not be considered to be over\". So krishnaji, the question is that usually ramnavmi comes in chaitramas(march) and gopalkala comes in shravanmas(july to august} but Baba mentioned gopalkala to be celebrated the very next day of ramnavami and told that the festival would not end without it to the devotees so is there some spiritual mystery behind it chapter 6 ramnavami utsav this chapter is all about how ramnavmi festival and urus was celebrated on the same day in shirdi there can be no greater example of equality of all religion than this when the cradle was being taken down after the conclusion of ramnavmi celebration Baba hindered and restricted to do so until tomorrow gopalkala is celebrated this festival cannot be concluded the message that Baba wants to give through this leela that O man, if your spiritual journey has reached till Rama then do not consider it complete because you have to reach krishna 'atmaram' is used to address ram whereas Krishna is addressed as 'shree Krishna paramatma' but there is one thing unless the person has acquired the qualities of ram his or hers reach till Krishna is impossible because ram is a gateway to Krishna ram is the foundation then Krishna is the mansion if ram is childhood then Krishna is juvenility so ram is a stepping stone. First of all you have to become as maryada purushottam as ram his character has to be instilled in our hearts the day that character descends into us I become ram but the difficulties which arrived in the life of ram, struggling which Rama became ram, one should not forget them the basic truth and ethics of ram unless it descends in one's life, unless my journey reaches till rama existence I am not able to reach till Krishna consciousness so Baba wanted to tell every devotee through this leela that the spiritual journey is fulfilled up to Krishna and not up to Rama but it may take births to build the character of Rama or else with intense spiritual practice one can reach in a few years. it depends on one's appetite. depends on one's eligibility and if we look carefully it has been clearly mentioned in scriptures that if someone journeys till Agya chakra ram he becomes and they say that the journey up to the sahastra is difficult but if one reaches Krishna he becomes if I look at it with the yoga perspective then this is also among its aspect also ram was born at 12 in noon in the month of chaitra whereas Krishna takes birth at 12 in midnight in the month of shravana with the heat of chaitra month and 12 in noon one can imagine how austere that character must be when but when this heat of purification is accepted positively then Krishna is born in the month of shravana that too at 12 midnight so cold complete conversion is done if you look at rams life although he did not want to but because of him whole family suffered as he wanted to practice dharma so indirectly he dragged so many people around him in misery but the birth of krishna was to elevate his parents from agony if ram is a gateway then krishna is destination you have to go through ram if you want to become krishna journey till ram would not be accepted one must reach the pedestal of krishna was the message of baba and unless you reach till krishna the life is incomplete believe it let us fit in our consciousness that the journey is to krishna until we reach the point we are not the devotees of baba so this can be the message i think the essence of this leela first, baba used to call the mosque in which he spent his entire life as dwarkamai dwarkamai is the city of dwarka where lord krishna used to live it is clear as if baba is saying i am the perfect human i am the supreme being shri krishna and this mosque is my dwarka so you all have to reach to the point where i stand second in the 10 divine forms of lord vishnu first avatar ram comes to existence and then avatar krishna the principal mantra of varkari sect 'ram krishna hari' krishna is chanted after ram and hare rama hare krishna too gives the same testimony but to destinate krishna one has to pass through rama being ram the essence of the entire vishnushastranama shloka is in the mantra which means vishnu's 1000 names is equivalent to 1 ram naam without living the life of ram if someone heads to become Krishna directly, then he won't become Krishna but yes shakuni he would become. and last but important lesson without living with Dharma, sacrifice and dignity of ram krishna's glory power and authority can never be achieved without living with a vow of loyalty to one's wife like Rama this humanity could never understand various leelas of Krishna like the rasleela, the marriage with 16000 women or gopika vastrharan",
    "Description": "✨Shri Sai Satcharitra Adhyay 6✨\n\nWhy Did Sai Baba Celebrate Gopalkala Right After Ram Navami?\n\nIn this deeply reflective episode, Krishna ji unfolds the profound significance of a unique tradition started by Sai Baba in Shirdi — celebrating *Ram Navami and Urs on the same day, followed by \"Gopalkala\" the very next day.\n\nThis event, described in Chapter 6 of the Shri Sai Satcharitra, is not just about festivals. It carries timeless spiritual truths about unity, surrender, and the journey from discipline to divine joy.\n\nFirst, the Message of Oneness:\nBy choosing to celebrate a Hindu and a Muslim festival together, Sai Baba gave a powerful and living message of 'Sarva Dharma Sambhav' — that all paths lead to the same divine. For Baba, religion was not a barrier, but a bridge. This celebration reflected his teaching of unity beyond form, ritual, and name.\n\nThen, the Inner Journey:\nRam Navami symbolises the path of duty, control, and righteousness — the disciplined life of Lord Rama. But Baba didn’t stop there. The very next day, he had devotees celebrate Gopalkala — a symbol of the playful, blissful energy of Krishna.\n\nThis reveals a deeper truth. Only after walking the path of dharma and restraint like Rama can one be ready for the divine love, joy, and surrender that Krishna represents.\n\nFrom Adnaya Chakra to Sahastrahara — The Spiritual Ascent:\nKrishna ji explains how this journey is not only mythological but internal. From the Adnaya chakra, representing will and clarity, the soul travels to the Sahastrara — the final union with the divine, where Krishna consciousness awakens. A spiritual journey from lord Ram to lord Krishna \n\nSai Baba’s Silent Teaching:\nBaba didn’t give lectures. He lived his wisdom. Through these three days of celebration — Ram Navami, Urs, and Gopalkala — he gave a complete path to the seeker. From discipline to devotion, from control to surrender, from duality to oneness.\n\nThis episode is a must-watch for every spiritual seeker and Sai devotee who wishes to understand Baba’s deeper message.\n\n-------------------------\n0:00 - Introduction\n\n1:51 - Reason behind celebrating Ramnavmi and Urus on same day \n\n2:37 - Spiritual journey Ram to Krishna \n\n5:01 - Agya Chakra to Sahastra / Yog Sadhna \n\n7:18 - Essence of this Leela \n------------------------\n\n✨श्री साई सच्चरित्र – अध्याय 6✨\n\nश्री साई सच्चरित्र – अध्याय 6 में वर्णित यह प्रसंग केवल एक धार्मिक उत्सव नहीं, बल्कि एक साधक की संपूर्ण आत्मिक यात्रा का संकेत है। इस वीडियो में कृष्णा जी बहुत सरल लेकिन गूढ़ ढंग साईबाबा की इस लीला रहस्य इस विडीओ समझाते हैं ।\n\nसर्वधर्म समभाव का संदेश \nसाई बाबा ने शिरडी में रामनवमी (हिंदू पर्व) और उर्स (मुस्लिम उत्सव) एक ही दिन मनवाकर यह बताया कि धर्म अलग हो सकते हैं, लेकिन परमात्मा एक ही हैं। यह लीला कर के बाबाने दुनियाको सर्वधर्म समभाव की सीख दि है।\n\nगोपालकाला – उत्सव की पूर्ति नहीं, आत्मा की पूर्णता:\nरामनवमी के अगले दिन बाबा ने गोपालकाला मनवाया। क्यों की बाबा भक्तो को ये समझाना चाहते थे की 'राम का जीवन संयम , दुःख और मर्यादा का है,'\nजबकि कृष्ण का जीवन आनंद और प्रेम से भरा है।\nइससे बाबा यह सिखा रहे थे कि 'आत्मिक सुख की प्राप्ति पहले आत्मनियंत्रण और मर्यादा के रास्ते से ही होती है।'\n\nराम से कृष्ण – आत्मा की यात्रा\nजिस प्रकार साधक पहले राम जैसे कठोर और मर्यादित जीवन से गुजरता है, तभी वह 'कृष्ण की लीलामय, मधुर अनुभूति' तक पहुँचता है।\n\"राम तक की यात्रा आज्ञाचक्र तक है और श्रीकृष्ण तक की यात्रा सहस्त्रार तक है ।\"\n\n\nयह वीडियो उन सभी भक्तों और साधकों के लिए है जो अपने जीवन को अध्यात्मिक उन्नती के पथ पर लाना चाहते है। सभी भक्तों से निवेदन है की ऐसी और सरल परंतू गहराई से भरी लीलाओंका सार जानने के लिए जुडे रहीये अपने साईलीला रहस्य युट्यूब चॅनल के साथ।\n\n🙏🏻॥ ॐ साई राम ॥🙏🏻\n\n#saibaba #jaisai #shirdi #shirdisai #youth #genz #shirdisaibaba #saisatcharitra #spiritualism #millennials #saileela #saibabateachings #saisatcharitraleelas #saidarshan #youtube #shraddha #saburi #spiritualwisdom #krishnaji #bhaktipath #vedanticwisdom #innerjourney  #divinegrace #saikripa #saidevotees #saispiritualtalk #corespirituality #saileelarahasya #trending #like #comment #share #explore …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, sai, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, sai songs, saiwani, sai baba songs, miracles, saibaba miracles, chamatkar",
    "Views": "13,071 views",
    "Likes": "219"
  },
  {
    "Title": "शिर्डी दर्शन करने का सही क्रम | शिर्डी दर्शन करने का सही तरीका | शिर्डी यात्रा का तारिका",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7WoPUk3Hl3I",
    "Transcript": "To reach Samadhi mandir from Dwarkamai is the entire spiritual journey Sai baba appears as soon as we utter Shirdi. We all know about Baba's physical Shirdi. As we think of Shirdi, Samadhi mandir first comes to our mind once we visit amadhi mandir, then Dwarkamai, Chavadi, Gurusthan and Nandadeep is visited and it feels like we have visited Whole Shirdi. every devotee considers himself blessed after visiting these five places. This is physical shirdi. But does these places have any Spiritual depth. if we talk about spiritual shirdi then the sequence would change. when we come for darshan, first of all we have darshan of samadhi mandir and later we visit other places. but if we talk about spiritual shirdi, then it begins with Dwarkamai where Baba first came and settled for 60 years. Spiritual Shirdi begins with dwarkamai because baba was sitting there, kindling the dhuni which is still burning today. In the fifth chapter, there is a verse is about Dhuni as if Baba himself being Hemadpant, elucidates the glory of dhuni \"He seemed to be offering into the dhuni oblations of the ego, along with all the desires and the various affections of the mind. In fact, all the temptations of the worldly life, by various wiles and ways\". Why Baba was sitting with Kindled dhuni. This verse describes it well. Baba has lighten up the Dhuni to offer all the ego, passion, desires and affections of the mind within his devotees, , all the temptations of the worldly life are incinerated in the dhuni and that to wisely making it as a bannister, Sadguru knows how to ablute his devotees, very well wisely He handles and ablutes His devotees burning up all the temptations of worldly life with dhuni And until the dirt inside us is dissipated, we are not connected even by affiliated to Him. At the beginning when we come to his shelter, we bring all the filth within us along. So that filth needs to be washed away, for which he smolders us. Therefore our entry (into Shirdi) begins with Dwarkamai.Today, even though we come running to take darshan of Samadhi Mandir but Considering our position & looking at Shirdi with Spiritual perspective. We have no right to visit Samadhi Mandir Our position is Limited to Dwarkamai Though we take Darshan of all the places in Shirdi but the real position lies in Dwarkamai because much of inner Filth is not yet burnt. So now I need to incinerate myself into Dhuni. Thus, my journey begins with Dwarkamai that is my first Stop. As long as I am away from my master's orders, reasoned for my ego, desires and infatuations. i am not even in the vicinity of him. And the day when Baba annihilates all the dirt by incinerating it in dhuni, on that day I am ready for 2nd stage-Gurusthan. I can reach Gurusthan in 10 steps walking from Dwarkamai physically. But if I think of the internal journey I would have to take several births to accomplish it, , from Dwarkamai to Gurusthan, ,Because to reach Gurusthan means to acquire the ability to feel his heart and walk accordingly.Without his utterance.The day when such a ability dwells within me,that day I have reached Gurusthan from Dwarkamai. . Gurusthan, Where the Guru does not need to utter a single word from his mouth just understanding his heart, I may start behaving accordingly. That day I became a devotee of Guru. My journey reached to second stop ‘Gurusthan’. Now I have become a resident of Gurusthan. Now I have left 'Dwarkamai'. Now I don't need that scorching heat anymore because all the filth within me is burnt. reaching Gurusthan means now my ego will not hinder Baba. There is no need for words to come out of his mouth.His words will touch my heart.I will begin to walk on his path without giving a second thought,where all these begins to shape is Gurusthan. From where the Baba feels that He can take me to a higher position. He can push me towards subtle spiritual journey, as his ego has eroded, Now the devotee would never stand against Baba. As his rebellious mind is destroyed, he has reached the uplifiting State of mind. Baba Knows,\"I can take him on a journey to the astral world very easily.I will be able to purify him with his subtle veins inside\". And then Baba takes me to Nandadeep Nandadeep means the torch that was lit up by baba between Peeple and Neem tree,which represents the two nadis (ida and pingla). Nandadeep means the light once lit it never goes out. The Eternal Flame. And it is aroused in our 'Agya Chakra'. Spiritual light. So we reach the third stage [Nandadeep] as He purifys our ida and Pingla Nadi and lits the tourch between the two known as 'Agya Chakra'. The flame that never extinguishes,that felling of Soul which never fades away.This is Nandadeep. And once the flame/torch (agya chakara) is lightened he take us to the 4th Stage 'Chavadi' Now according to Sai Satcharitra, baba use to stay every alternative night in 'Chavadi' His sleeping process there was very unique. Normally a man lays a sheet and sleeps but Baba use to lay more than 60 Sheets now this leela is absurd, if any person wants some softness of bedding then he will sleep on blanket but who sleeps laying sheets over sheets. , but here Baba wants to say that when the whole world fell asleep in the deep darkness of the night, his yogik Kriya would start. . Here 64 sheets means 64-Yogik actions mentioned in 'Yog Shastra'. . So then after being bestowed by the realization of soul, all the yogik actions are began, in Chavadi the fourth stage. And after being furnished with all 64 yogik actions, the last stage is destined 'Samadhi Mandir', Where a normal devotee is now a 'Bramhand Nayak' 'A Universal Perfect' Supreme being of the eternal Universe,majesty of majesties,king of all yogs,the bramhan himself,glory to shree satchitanand sadguru sainath maharaj. So to reach that Ovation one will have to go through such a long journey ending on Samadhi Mnadir. If someone has the sense about the Spiritual journey or realization then this big is the journey Physically, I can cover all the places in 100 steps but it may take a hundred births in Subtle way. this is the complete spiritual journey from dwarkamai to samdhi mandir And as long as this Subtle Shirdi is not understood. Even though we consider ourselves to be very close to baba, , we might visit Shirdi again and again, impatient to visit Samadhi mandir. But I believe that those who understands their heart deeply that lot of Sinfulness is left to burn, to Fade. Then Dwarkamai is our position. If we go home after visiting Dwarkamai only then it will be lot better atleast we would accept that our reach is till Dwarkamai. We are not yet meant for Samadhi mandir. Because if we will accept then only we can understand the deepth of Dwarkamai or else we will be deceiving ourselves. This does not mean that one should not visit the Samadhi mandir physically , but internally one should know that my status is limited to Dwarkamai. . If there is such a clarity then I believe that Subtle Shirdi is Clear. If you feel then this is probably the secret of subtle shirdi.",
    "Description": "Shirdi Darshan | शिर्डी दर्शन | Shirdi of Saibaba | साईबाबा कीं शिर्डी  |  शिर्डी यात्रा का तारिका …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, sai, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, sai songs, saiwani, sai baba songs, miracles, saibaba miracles, chamatkar",
    "Views": "24,573 views",
    "Likes": "283"
  },
  {
    "Title": "New Year's Prayer | New Year Prayer | Sai Prarthana | Saibaba",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JgZSXoTecc8",
    "Transcript": "Om Sai Ram O Sadguru Sai May this New Year’s morning be unique for me. May I be able to bathe You in tears filled with unwavering devotion. Whatever virtues exist in this world - may they descend into me, and may I adorn You with them as ornaments. May the darkness of my mind, my ignorance, sensual desires, all my impurities and vices - be transformed into offerings of sacred delicacies to present at Your feet. Just as my breath flows ceaselessly, so too may the nectar of Your Name continuously descend into the depths of my heart. May the intoxication of Your devotion become so intense, that I forget myself entirely. May Your unwavering devotion become my humble handmaiden. May all the attachments and pleasures of my worldly life forever serve to quench your thirst. May my presence among family and companions, become a reason for them too to take to Your devotion. And when I awaken on the morning of the New Year, may I no longer remain who I was. May a new birth have already awakened within me.",
    "Description": "🌻Om Sai Ram\nStart your New Year with a soul-stirring prayer to Sadguru Sai. This heartfelt offering seeks not blessings for the world—but the transformation of the self. A call for unwavering devotion, dissolution of ego, and the birth of a new, surrendered life at the feet of the Master. Let each breath chant His Name. Let this year begin not with resolutions, but with rebirth. ✨🕉️\n\n🌻 Om Sai Ram\nStart your New Year with a soul-stirring prayer to Sadguru Sai. This heartfelt offering seeks not blessings for the world—but the transformation of the self. A call for unwavering devotion, dissolution of ego, and the birth of a new, surrendered life at the feet of the Master. Let each breath chant His Name. Let this year begin not with resolutions, but with rebirth.\n\n\n#sai #saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory #saibabadevotee #saibabadevontionalsongs #saileearahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileerahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saitababababa #saisansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, sai, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, sai songs, saiwani, sai baba songs, miracles, saibaba miracles, chamatkar",
    "Views": "2,260 views",
    "Likes": "202"
  },
  {
    "Title": "रहस्या पानी से दिया जलाने का | Sai ne Pani Se Diye Jalaye",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F_8wJl8cb-0",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "✨Adhyay 5 (Ovi 101-114)- From Atheism to Awakening: Baba’s Transformative Miracle✨In this profound discourse, Krishnaji dives deep into one of Shirdi Sai Bab...",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, sai, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, sai songs, saiwani, sai baba songs, miracles, saibaba miracles, chamatkar",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "तुने साई द्वार पे जितने दीप जलाये | Tune Sai Dwar pe Jitne Deep Jalaye | Sai Songs | Sai Wani",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SEd85fR7IZ0",
    "Transcript": "Tune Sai Dwar Pai Song The more lamps you light at Sai's door, the more the darkness in your life will decrease. The more lamps you light at Sai's door, the more the darkness in your life will decrease The more lamps of faith, principles, and righteousness you light in Sai's court or for Sai's sake... The more you try to know his heart, the more you bask in his light... The more the darkness in your life will fade, as long as you realize that your entire life is being spent in the dark alleys of illusion(maya). This gaudy, worthless, and sparkling world is far from God. This gaudy, worthless, and sparkling world is far from God. How long will you be ground in the millstones of this world? The more lamps you light at Sai's door, the more the darkness in your life will decrease. This gaudy, worthless, and sparkling world is far from God. How long will you be ground in the millstones of this world? Since when has this gaudy, worthless, and sparkling world had any connection with God or Sai? Till the attraction of this gaudy,worthless and sparkling world is alive within you till then you will break yourself in the two millstones of this world How long will you break yourself in the two millstones of this world—good and evil, flowers and thorns, life and death, or happiness and sorrow? Oh, deluded, worldly person, true worship is gratitude Oh, deluded, worldly person, true worship is gratitude In every situation he smiles's, who sing's sai bhajan's The more lamps you light at Sai's door, the more the darkness in your life will decrease. Oh, deluded, worldly person, true worship is gratitude. In every situation he smiles's, who sing's sai bhajan's Oh! crazy person trapped in the labyrinth of this world Oh, worldly person, who is being deceived day and night by the illusions of the world! You and your worship, both are fake Do you know what true worship is? The one who accepts all - happiness or sorrow, grief or joy—like a beggar who takes alms is the true devotee Because when a person truly sings Sai's hymns, which are selfless and without desire are the only true devotees Keep serving Sai; sunshine and shade are a sweet fruit. Keep serving Sai; sunshine and shade are a sweet fruit. 7:33 The one who understands the secret of knowledge and meditation will never be deceived. The more lamps you light at Sai's door, the more the darkness in your life will decrease. Keep serving Sai; sunshine and shade are a sweet fruit. The one who understands the secret of knowledge and meditation will never be deceived. Whether it's sun or shade, happiness or sorrow, success or failure, life or death, the service and worship of Sai should never cease Because this selfless and desireless worship and service will grant you knowledge and meditation. And then you will become the conquerer of this illusory world The world is a fair of puppets, where every person dances alone. The world is a fair of puppets, where every person dances alone. You're a guest for just a moment. What are you so proud of? The more lamps you light at Sai's door, the more the darkness in your life will decrease. The world is a fair of puppets, where every person dances alone. You're a guest for just a moment. What are you so proud of? Oh! human, nothing is in your control. Not your body, not your mind, not your senses, and not your intellect. And because of this, neither happiness nor sorrow is in your control You are merely a puppet whose strings are in the hands of the great illusionist Maya. Here, every person is born to dance to the tunes of Maya, get tired, and die. Despite being so helpless and impoverished, you remain so proud. Atleast tell me what it is that you are so arrogant about? The restless waves of the ocean of the mind never stop at any shore. The restless waves of the ocean of the mind never stop at any shore. A pearl is something that the oysters themselves come to take. The restless waves of the ocean of the mind never stop at any shore. A pearl is something that the oysters themselves come to take. If the mind is a restless ocean all its good and bad desires are the restless waves, and the shores that lure the mind are everywhere. Oh! human, never stay at the shore that lure your mind Infact you become the oyster who will dive deep himself to attain Sai, the pearl itself ,and rises to the surface of the sea, abandoning its depths. This means, oh human, you must overcome these desires and strive to attain that Supreme Being because He is the only one who will give you eternal happiness and bliss. The more lamps you light at Sai's door, the more the darkness in your life will decrease. Shree Satchidanad Sadguru Sainath Maharaj Ki Jay (Glory to Shi Sai)",
    "Description": "Om Sai Ram 🙏\nIn this soul-stirring talk, Krishnaji takes us beyond melody—into mantra.\nLine by line, stanza by stanza, He unpacks the inner essence of a powerful devotional song ‘Tune Sai Dwar pe Jitne Deep Jalaye’. What might seem like poetic praise on the surface transforms—under His guidance—into a deep, meditative exploration of bhakti, surrender, and self-realization.\nKrishnaji doesn’t just explain the words—He reveals the living truth hidden within them.\nWhether you’ve sung this bhajan for years or are hearing it for the first time, this satsang will transform it into an experience. It’s not just about understanding the song… it’s about letting it enter your heart, awaken your devotion, and draw you closer to the Divine.\n🙏 Let every verse become a mirror.\nLet every note become a step inward.\nLet every meaning unfold as darshan.\n\nॐ साई राम 🙏\nइस हृदय को झकझोर देने वाले सत्संग में, कृष्णाजी हमें सुरों से, मंत्र की गहराई तक ले जाते हैं।\nपंक्ति दर पंक्ति, चरण दर चरण, वे एक शक्तिशाली भक्तिगीत 'तुने साई द्वार पे जितने दीप जलाये’, के आंतरिक सार को खोलते हैं।\nजो केवल एक काव्यात्मक स्तुति जैसा प्रतीत होता है, वह उनके मार्गदर्शन में एक गहन, ध्यानमय यात्रा बन जाता है—भक्ति, समर्पण और आत्मबोध की।\nकृष्णाजी केवल शब्दों का अर्थ नहीं बताते—\nवे उन शब्दों में छिपी जीवंत सत्यता को प्रकट करते हैं।\nचाहे आपने यह भजन वर्षों से गाया हो या पहली बार सुन रहे हों,\nयह सत्संग उस भजन को एक अनुभव में बदल देगा।\nयह केवल समझने का विषय नहीं—\nबल्कि उसे अपने हृदय में बसाने, अपनी भक्ति को जाग्रत करने, और ईश्वर के और निकट आने का निमंत्रण है।\n🙏हर पंक्ति एक दर्पण बन जाए।\nहर सुर एक अंतर्मुखी कदम।\nहर अर्थ एक दर्शन बन कर प्रकट हो।\n\n#sai #saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, sai, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi, sai songs, saibaba songs, saiwani, sai baba songs",
    "Views": "67,539 views",
    "Likes": "713"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Sai v/s Astrologer | सद्गुरू vs ज्योतिष | Astrologer and Astrology surrendered in front of Sai",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N1MDShflc6U",
    "Transcript": "Hard Work or luck /actions or fake who dominates whom since time immemorial, this human race has been standing in the confusion, Om Sai Ram. In the 29th chapter of sai sathcharitra there is the story of Raghunath Rao Tendulkar's son Babu who was studing medical science once he asked an astrologer whether he would pass the examination so astrologer examined planetary position and said this year is not favorable. Next year you will pass the exam with good score. Hearing this Babu Rao got dejected. His mother Savitri Bai knew about it. So when she went Shirdi after some days she told the whole truth to Baba. On hearing this Baba said, '' Tell him to listen to me! say that I have said to rollup and keep aside that horoscope and go and appear for the exam with his mind at rest. You will succeed. Have full faith in me ! '' When mother conveyed Baba's message to boy he was encouraged and went for examination. But his self confidence gave away and began to feel that he had failed and therefore he did not appear for oral exam. He excluded the first day of exam but on second day the examiner told his friend to bring him and give him the glad news that he has passed his written exam. Babu Rao felt inexplicable joy on hearing this news. Krishnaji, one thing is clear from this story that one should not go for horoscope. But even today many people prefer astrology How far is it good or bad to prefer astrology pls enlightend as on this. This story looks as if it is sadguru VS astrologer. Peripherally the story is such Babu Rao is preparing for his medical examination and works very hard for it. Burning the midnight oil. No dearth of hard work Due to external influences on mind we sometimes go astray unwillingly. Under such influense Babu Rao decides to ask astrologer as such, I have prepared so much for the exam. So are my planetary position apt ? with that curiosity he attains some astrologer And the astrologer on examine the planetary position,stars zodiac signs,etc. says,''This year is not favourable you won't qualify the examination. No matter how hard you work.'' As soon as he heard it his whole enthusiasm dissipates. He tells to his mother that his efforts are going to be vain. Mom gets upset too After some day when she goes to Shirdi and keeps this topic in front of Baba. So Baba says a word to his mother ''Tell him to listen to me !, say that I have said to roll up and keep aside that horoscope and go and appear for the exam, with his mind. ''Tell him that not to be taken in by anybody, do not show the horoscope or rely on palmists and to carry on his studies resolutely.'' So Baba hear is giving importance to hard work Not on fate Fate is a progeny of 'Karma'/actions My fate is a consequence of my actions First deeds then fate the stars and planets Baba is stressing on hardwork here Tell the boy, you will succeed, you should appear for the exam with a relaxed mind and do not get dejected. Have full faith in me ! His words in former verse to carry on studies resolutely is important. Astrology deals with position of stars and planets. But spiritual knowledge or Sadguru's wisdom deals with 'Purushartha'. If a person does 'Purushartha' truly with complete control then he can also change his fate . All other gods are illusory (gods, goddess, astrology etc) unreal; the guru alone is the God Eternal. Once you repose your faith in him , he will help you overcome even the pre-destined. Baba indirectly tells Babu Rao to keep faith in Him more than his fate as he can change his destiny. Baba signifies here 'Purushartha' keep on with your efforts. Do not believe horoscope and Kudali, etc. believe your hard work. There is a shayari relevant to it. I don't know the writer of it but it is coming to my mind that 'who says that there cannot be a hole in the sky, throw a stone with full capacity friend'. indirectly it wants say that you resolutely make efforts so you can overcome even the pre-destined. just one should have sadguru's hands of blessing on one's head Baba here wants to say that I am here to spent the treasure of spirituality on you and you are crying or complaining with your fate. You just throw the stone of Purushartha on the sky and see these planets and stars, moon, etc. will be at your feet. I am (baba) there for you just show the efforts, the purushartha and i lay the moon, the sun, the planets etc on your feet. om sai ram. Essence of this leela. Hard Work or luck /actions or fake who dominates whom since time immemorial, this human race has been standing in the confusion, without seed there can't be tree similarly, without actions it is not possible to imagine fate, as actions is the mother of fate. What you sow is what you reap. Your deeds will come forward What is happiness and sadness, its the fruit of your deeds. As you sow, so shall you reap. but according to our Sai or Krishna, the composer of Gita, fate does not exist. because they assert to do deeds without the worry of luck and without the desire for fruit. if a person knows the skill of carrying out every good work without the desire for fruit by holding this sacred word then along with the sun, the moon, the stars whole universe will be at his feet. and instead of being a puppet of fate he would be its controller.",
    "Description": "अध्याय २९ – ज्योतिष पर विश्वास या केवल सद्गुरु की शरण\n\n\"करके जो तू आया, वही आगे पाएगा,\nपूर्व कर्म ही तेरा भविष्य बनाता है।\nपर जो कर्म करे बिना फल की इच्छा के,\nऐसे पुरुषार्थी को सद्गुरु अपनाते हैं।\"\n\nइस अध्याय के माध्यम से साईं बाबा अन्ना जी की कथा द्वारा हमें एक अमूल्य संदेश दे रहे हैं —\nहे मानव! यदि तू सच्चे हृदय से निरंतर पुरुषार्थ करता है, तो तेरे कर्म ही तेरा भाग्य बदल सकते हैं।\n\nऐसी स्थिति में तुझे न ज्योतिषियों के पास जाने की आवश्यकता रहेगी, न ही हस्तरेखा या सामुद्रिक शास्त्र की भविष्यवाणियों पर निर्भर रहने की।\nक्योंकि जब कर्म निष्काम हो, और निष्ठा अडिग हो, तब सद्गुरु स्वयं प्रसन्न होकर अपनी अनंत कृपा की वर्षा करते हैं।\n\nइस कलियुग की भ्रमित कर देने वाली राहों में, केवल सद्गुरु ही एकमात्र शाश्वत शक्ति हैं जो कर्मों को रूपांतरित कर, जीवन की दिशा ही बदल सकते हैं।\n\nतो आओ, इस सत्संग के माध्यम से जानें —\nकैसे कर्म, श्रद्धा और सद्गुरु की कृपा से भाग्य भी नम्र हो जाता है।\n\nॐ साईंनाथाय नमः 🙏\n\n\nChapter 29 – Faith in Astrology or Sole Surrender to the Sadguru\n\n\"Whatever you have done, that alone you shall receive,\nYour past actions shape your future indeed.\nBut one who acts without desire for the fruit,\nSuch a doer is embraced by the Sadguru absolute.\"\n\nThrough this chapter, Sai Baba, via the story of Anna Ji, imparts to us a priceless message —\nO human! If you act with sincere effort and a pure heart, your own actions have the power to transform your destiny.\n\nIn such a state, you need not consult astrologers, palmists, or seek predictions from any other scriptural science.\nBecause when your actions are selfless and your faith unwavering, then the Sadguru Himself showers His infinite grace upon you.\n\nIn this confusing age of Kaliyuga, only the Sadguru is the eternal guiding force who can transform your karma and redirect your entire life path.\n\nSo come, through this satsang let us understand —\nhow true effort, faith, and the Sadguru’s grace can even humble fate itself.\n\nOm Sai Nathaya Namah 🙏\n\n\nREFERENCE : \nSHREE SAI SATCHARITA ADHYAY 29 …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "video, sharing, camera phone, video phone, free, upload",
    "Views": "24,057 views",
    "Likes": "373"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Why was Sai Baba so attached with a small insignificant brick that he gave up his life for ?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uAqGnuh7ufo",
    "Transcript": "It is an offense to say that i am body and on the other hand it is also wrong to neglect it by considering it as a failure om sai ram For years together, there used to be an old brick of baba's, on which he rested his head while sitting in yogasana. But one day during cleaning of dwarkamai the brick broke falling down into pieces from some boy's hand. when Baba heard this his eyes filled with tears and said, \"it is not the brick but my companion of lifetime has gone add I too, cannot remain without it. And really after some days Baba disintegrated his body into five elements. Krishnaji, sadguru like Baba lamenting for such a transient brick and calling it as a companion is incomprehensible. please illuminate its depth chapter 44 is related to Baba's samadhi and the brick that you mentioned is showed as a sign of in-auspiciousness. As the brick breaks and shatters, Baba says,\" today my fortune is broken, now as this break is not left I will not be there either\". These are his words mentioned in this chapter according to your question as there was no place for any infatuation in his life then why such attachment for a brick. firstly if you look at brick it is made-up of soil It is made-up of soil scorched in fire. so soil is what Baba is giving importance for This soil is the body, human body so here baba is talking about his body with the help of brick. and he is saying, \"the body given by almighty, I made good use of it\". with the support of this body I have done my spiritual progress. I purified the mind with the help of this brick. I experienced my soul with the help of this brick with its help I reached the strata of parabrahma The body is brick with the help of which I(baba) have accomplished my spiritual journey today it's time that this brick, this body has to fall and shatter therefore to show the importance of this body on one hand showing its importance on the other he says it as a companion Normally we call companion to life partner Man calls his wife as a companion of lifetime who accompanies. by calling body as companion he indirectly says,\"I am not the body\". but at the same time with its hold I can complete my spiritual journey with making good use of this body my experience of atma and paramatma is accomplished but today as the body is taking leave therefore he expresses grief and sorrow at the same time he also says that he is not this brick so there are two things in it first he shows that he is not the body and second he shows the important of the mortal body through which he reached the immortal state this(body) too has some importance so this is the Leela that makes one realize the importance he is telling us to that the feeling of yours that i am body should shatter you are not this body and in response to this be not completely neglect it it's important is just that through it you can do the journey till atman and paramatman it is an offense to say that I am body and on the other hand it is also wrong to neglect it by considering it as a failure both the thinking are wrong so this is what Baba wants to say through this leela",
    "Description": "Why was Sai Baba so attached with a small insignificant brick that he gave up his life for ? | आखिर साईबाबा को एक मामुली ईट पर इतना मोह क्यों था ?\n\n🧱 बाबा की ईंट – एक साधारण वस्तु या गूढ़ संकेत? | Shri Sai Baba का रहस्यमयी प्रेम ईंट से | आध्यात्मिक संदेश\n\nश्री साईं बाबा का जीवन रहस्य और करुणा से भरा हुआ है। पर क्या आपने कभी सोचा है कि एक साधारण सी ईंट से बाबा को इतना ममत्व क्यों था? क्या वह ईंट केवल विश्राम का साधन थी या फिर एक माध्यम जिसके द्वारा बाबा हमें आत्मबोध का कोई गहरा संदेश देना चाहते थे?\n\nइस वीडियो में हम दो गहरे आध्यात्मिक प्रश्नों पर ध्यान केंद्रित करेंगे:\n1️⃣ इंसानी देह का वास्तविक उद्देश्य क्या है?\n2️⃣ क्या हमें देह से मोह रखना चाहिए या इसे तुच्छ मानना चाहिए?\n\nबाबा के जीवन की इस प्रतीकात्मक ईंट के माध्यम से हम आत्मचिंतन, विरक्ति और सच्चे अध्यात्म के मार्ग को समझने का प्रयास करेंगे।\n\n🌿 यह वीडियो उनके लिए है जो साईं बाबा की शिक्षाओं को सिर्फ सुनना नहीं, बल्कि समझना और आत्मसात करना चाहते हैं।\n\n🔔 वीडियो पसंद आए तो Like, Share और Subscribe करना न भूलें।\n📩 अपने विचार और अनुभव कमेंट में जरूर साझा करें।\n\nजय साई राम 🙏🏻\n\n\n#sai #saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, sai, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi",
    "Views": "22,065 views",
    "Likes": "335"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Why would Baba keep burnt match sticks in his Pocket? | Why did Sai keep burnt match sticks?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1a59AgfWz5M&pp=0gcJCSMKAYcqIYzv",
    "Transcript": "If I went on picking up or collecting burnt matchsticks while going to market people will consider me as insane or demented. But we can't see baba with that perspective Two verses from sai charitra's 14 chapter are completely contradictory to each other Initially, for a very long time, baba did not accept anything, but would collect only the burnt match sticks and fill his pocket with them. Whenever anyone came to take darshan and began worshiping his feet, he would first ask for dakshina be he Hindu, Muslim or a Parsi. i humbly request you to put some light on these two verses Initially, for a very long time, Baba did not accept anything Initially when Baba appeared in shirdi at the age of 16 during those days for many years Baba never used to take anything from anybody Instead he used to collect burn sticks (matchsticks) He used to collect such burnt sticks and put it into his pocket Question is what is the mystery behind the collection of burnt sticks as this leela is mentioned in the charitra then there will be a motive behind it definitively. Baba won't do it unnecessarily honestly, a maniac only can do such things. If I went on picking up or collecting burnt matchsticks while going to market people will consider me as insane or demented but a sadguru can't be a maniac. He is omnipotent a complete persona. so definitely behind such practice of Baba there must be some reason. with the aid of 5th chapter of charitra we can go deep into the matter to know his intuitions. in which it is mentioned that baba only used to stay in the company of yogis and Saints such as devidas, jankidas, gangagir His time used to spend between such people He used to less interact with worldly people, initially. This is deeply relevant to match stick leela If you observe carefully a burnt matchstick the upper coated part is burned in black ash and some part of a stick is also burnt remaining as it is here if the stick represents the body of human being the upper coated part is human head burnt head Here burnt head means whose ego is completely destroyed or melted a person who has completely annihilated his ego He used to keep such person close in his pocket near his heart. They are the brunt match sticks. so with such saintly personalities like devidas, Gangagir, jankidas he used to spend much of his time. Such people were very close to his heart initially as the time passed His sadna also mature, now we will have to assume like this and when he became unanimous He felt that if I had come into this world as a complete man and would remain among the saints then what would have I earn if i live my life spending close to such people may be baba felt it, as if his heart began to hurt no, if i can make an ordinary man a saint then nobility is in it when an ordinary man used to come for darshan he asked for dakshina to establish conscience and dispassion among them to sweep out the money from the devotees means to pull out the attachments in them because all branches of attachments are rooted to money man fulfills his attachments on the basis of money. To extort money means to extort all the hope and where are all hope desires fell off an ordinary man becomes a saint burnt match stick is burnt head meaning whose conceit is incinerated, melted, fallen such people were kept close to him light in darkness has a meaning futile is when i lit the already lighten place as if He realized and started being with the ordinary man with the aim of transforming them into sainthood Meaningful will be my life so He started making connection with common people and then in the form of dakshina he used to sway away the attachments of his devotees and from ordinary man he would impel them towards saintly hood, this is secret behind this leela",
    "Description": "Have you ever wondered why Sai Baba used to collect burnt matchsticks?\n\nIn \"Shri Sai Satcharitra\" Chapter 14, OV 115, it is mentioned that initially Baba did not take anything from anyone - he just kept the burnt matchsticks in his pocket. This simple looking act, actually has a deep spiritual meaning.\n\nIf a common man did this, people would think he was crazy, but Baba was the incarnation of the Supreme Being. Then why did he do this?\n\nAre the burnt matchsticks a symbol of 'Nihankarita' (ego-less life)?\n\nIn this video, we will try to understand this mystery - through the vision and spiritual expressions of Sri Krishna.\n\n✨ Watch this video till the end and know how a great message can be hidden even in a small thing.\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiCharitra #SpiritualWisdom #Nirahankari #DivineTeachings #KrishnaVani #saileerahasya \n\nHave you ever wondered why Sai Baba used to collect burnt matchsticks?\nIn Chapter 14, verse 115 of the Shri Sai Satcharitra, it is mentioned that in the early days, Baba would not accept anything from anyone — he would simply collect burnt matchsticks and keep them in his pocket.\n\nThis seemingly simple act holds a deep spiritual meaning.\n\nIf an ordinary person did this, people might call them crazy. But Baba was no ordinary person — he was the incarnation of the Supreme Consciousness (Parabrahma). So why did he do this?\n\nCould these burnt matchsticks be a symbol of egolessness — complete absence of ego?\n\nIn this video, we attempt to uncover this profound mystery — through the divine lens of Lord Krishna and deeper spiritual understanding.\n\n▪ Watch till the end to discover how even the simplest things can carry the greatest teachings.\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiCharitra #SpiritualWisdom #Egolessness #DivineTeachings #KrishnaWisdom #SaiLeela …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, sai, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi",
    "Views": "18,271 views",
    "Likes": "381"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Incomparable devotion of devotee Dr. Pandit | एक महान भक्त डॉ.पंडित की बेमिसाल भक्ती ( अध्याय ११ )",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YR9iNWPbUX8",
    "Transcript": "If such a gurubhakt comes to my court (baba's) then what about me even bramha, vishnu and mahesh would have to bow down in front of him. So superior is his gurubhakti. if we understand the depth of this leela then we can assimilate the glory of a true guru bhakt om Sai Ram There is an interesting story of Tripundra in the 11th chapter of Sai satcharitra. The story is, Dr Pandit who was a friend of Tatyasaheb Noolkar came to shirdi to have sai baba's darshan. After making obeisance to Baba he sat down there for a moment for rest. then Baba said to him to go to dadasaheb kelkare's house dr Pandit went to dada's house and was received by him with courtesy when dada was all set to leave for the mosque to perform baba's pooja dr pandit too accompanied him as usual dadasaheb applied the sandalwood paste at Baba's feet and completed his pooja but dr Pandit grab the small dish of sandalwood paste from dada's hand and drew a neat tripundra on His forehead on seeing this kelkar felt some trepidation at heart as Baba would flare up by it because Baba never allowed anyone to apply tilak on his forehead and here dr Pandit went for complete tripundra astonishment was that Baba showed not a trace of anger rather he looked quite pleased krishnaji, here Baba never allowed anyone to smear a small tilak on his forehead, why such practice? And why so much love for dr Pandit tripundra? please enlighten us First of all it would be important to understand doctor pandit's personality he visited shirdi for the first time and he's mention in saisathcharitra comes only once Maybe he came again or not we don't know But he already was a disciple of a brahman guru He had immense love for his guru in his heart and with this assimilated love he reached shirdi dr Pandit had a strong feeling in his mind that Baba was a Muslim fakir he had a mentality that Baba was a Muslim fakir as He lives in a mosque this was his thoughts regarding Baba and during those days many used to think that He is a Muslim fakir such deep rooted was doctor pandits devotion towards his guru that wherever he would go whomever he would revere he would revere as his guru a shloka by ramdas swami that wherever my mind goes your image is all I see and wherever I bow my head your Lotus feet are there so this Leela satisfies the shloka with this frame of mind he went there (shirdi) in spite of believing he is a Muslim fakir the religious discrimination didn't meddle between his devotion Here people are trapped in sects 'this is my path, that's your way, this is my creed that is yours' people dwelling in such small wells how can they feel the enrichment of enormous sea dr Pandit was above all. Even though convicting Baba as a Muslim fakir he worshiped him same as he would worship his guru and Baba was touched by his sentiments and emotions so he gave him permission ovi number 54 from Chapter 11 'whoever the devotee and for whatever reason he might come Baba would not allow him to apply sandalwood paste on him on the forehead only mhalsapati would smear it on the throat the rest applied it to the feet' people who used to come shirdi Baba never allowed anyone to touch his forehead not even a small tilak was allowed only mhalsapati who was one of his ardent devotee was allowed to apply sandalwood paste on his throat rest all devotees would apply it to his feet but this ovi signifies a lot first of all throat is a center of vishudhi chakra where the internal purity and serenity hubs a person who is sitting on the throne of selfless motives wears the crown of vishuddhi chakra he revered Baba with no selfish motives as he reached the 5th chakra so was allowed to smear the sandalwood paste on the throat whereas Dr Pandit had purified the mind but he had also dropped the barrier of religion therefore he reached the forehead chakra agya chakra and those who are selfish who do not summon the power to shun the religious discrimination who worship Him for their selfish motives and one who pleads Him for one's own sake visits Baba's court for the fulfillment of their wishes for such kind of people Baba allowed to touch them to his feet as if their position is His feet only you cannot rise above my feet ever this sequence from bottom to top in the ovi is very important so the feets , throat , forehead and beyond this if someone journeys beyond this that is sastrar chakra then he is Baba himself there is no duality between the two this Leela illustrates an inner journey dr Pandit did worship Baba same as he used to worship his guru in front of such guru bhakti even bramha , vishnu and Mahesh would have to bow down if we understand the depth of this leela then we can assimilate the glory of a true guru bhakt",
    "Description": "Incomparable devotion of devotee Dr. Pandit  | एक महान भक्त डॉ.पंडित की बेमिसाल भक्ती ( अध्याय ११ )\n\n\n\n#sai #saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, sai, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi",
    "Views": "10,530 views",
    "Likes": "227"
  },
  {
    "Title": "\"Shraddha\" - \"Saburi\" (True Meaning) | श्रद्धा और सबुरी (सही अर्थ)",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=luzbpWP3qdo",
    "Transcript": "There are two reasons for when our faith (Shradha) and patience (Saburi) is shaken om sai ram Today Baba's temples are found in most of the countries around the world These two words 'Shradha and Saburi' are inscribed in them Baba uttered these two 'Moolmantras' forever in his life. Krishnaji, What Sai wants teach with these two words 'Shradha and Saburi'. please enlighten us Shradha and saburi these two mantras are so close to Baba as if they are His eyes without baba neither is shradha nor is saburi and without both nor is Baba No temple in the world would be there, where these two words are not present with Baba There is so uniformity between words & Baba In both the worlds either spiritual or material, these two words are of great importance If I want to achieve something in this material world then allegient faith on it is required as I want it or its my goal Which is called as one pointedness or intense faith to achieve something so this is shraddha and only wishing won't work along with it patience and hard work is needed I might fail many times but to persevere is needed, to struggle, be patient, to sweat for. All this together is 'saburi'. In this incomplete world with faith and patience if it does'nt work, then in spiritual world how could it work without shradha and saburi there . and in the charitra Baba clears that we cannot go further or spiritual path without faith and patience our understanding of faith (shradha) is duplicate/fake as it is a conditional faith because according to my will my Baba has done something for me. Then and then i am crying for him out. But this is not what Baba means, he means unconditional steadfast faith and that faith won't evolve without saburi/patience. even if I receive heaven from any other 'darbar' I don't want it go. but from your 'darbar' baba if receive hell every other moment, i wont leave your arm. for me this is shradha. To reach this destination, saburi is the vessel and we need to pass through the storms of trouble, obstacles and trials then that fake shradha will be converted into original one faith and patience looks like two separate words but the two side of a coin. if shradha is deepening that means saburi's presence is making this happen and if saburi is deepens that means shradha is present they are complementary to each other not separate. the rest of the practices or yoga are in reality for the ripening of faith and paatience in human. we perform rest all practices and yoga but because of dearth in saburi shradha become feeble and also faith and patience should not be inflicted or heard, instinctive it should be one should not even realize that one is suffering. Rather ,there should be satisfaction in tolerating it, sweetness in it. this can be called as real faith. bearing with exasperation what kind of saburi is this. i will give an example. If today Lord Rama Stands in front of me and if I ask him,\" o Lord Rama, you walked on the path of righteousness you have done so much noble in your life, you kept walking on moral path but still your life is nothing but full of hardships and difficulties so what did you achieve Do you know what would be the answer of Rama \"I don't know what I have achieved, by walking on moral path whether I received pleasure or pain i was not aware of that I had my eyes on righteousness just went on walking holding the Bannister of honesty unaware of my happiness and sadness I was so much in love with morality and goodness that I just went on my path Apart from these what are the ways to live I don't know the day we too could speak the similar , we have made saburi a nectar instead of poison, two reasons for our perturbed faith and patience. First, unfulfillment of wants as now a days baba is not doing my work lets go to Balaji or visit girnar etc. because I was deprived from my want and second reason for wavering faith. i am not getting what I want soon I cant wait. because of these two reasons my shradha and saburi are weaken. only one definition about shradha can be given as that from any other court i receive heaven i don't wont it but form your court baba even if i receive hell every other moment .i wont leave your arm. All these together is shradha and saburi The essence of this leela Though this leela baba is telling us that world has always been struggling between selfishness and spirituality passions and dispassion , daily needs and godly seeds. this never ending confusion can be solved only by understanding the depth of shradha and saburi I cannot fulfill your legitimate and illegitimate demands. Till today neither any god has done nor will do further. every miracle of mine, or my leela do initiates with selfishness but ends onto spirituality. how long will you be trapped in the delusion of my miracles and leelas beyond it when will you listen to my heart my ask for saburi as 2nd rupee means you will have to face difficulties and hardships this is the bitter truth on this kabir says,\"everyone likes to eat sweet and speak sweet, but none like to eat neem leaves which cure the body from all diseases\". in the end, on this leela My heart says, shradha and saburi are the two nostrils of the whole universe through which world's Adhyatma, Roohaniyat and spirituality breathes. either it is a country or any religion all are dormant unless they have the life of shradha and saburi. imperfect is the gratitude and imperfect is the honest attitude, if shradha and saburi are in solitude.",
    "Description": "साईबाबा के दो आखे है ये श्रद्धा और सबुरी | Two eyes of Saibaba \"Shraddha\" and \"Saburi\"\n\n\n\n#sai #saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, sai, shraddha, saburi, saitemples, shraddha saburi",
    "Views": "116,782 views",
    "Likes": "1,555"
  },
  {
    "Title": "कोई मन्नत करें तो ऐसा करें, एक सच्चा भक्त चोळकर की मन्नत की कहानी | Story of true devotee Cholkar",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ct-rtWPtH2E",
    "Transcript": "No transcript available",
    "Description": "🕉️ श्री साईं सच्चरित्र | अध्याय 15 | श्री चोलकर जी की कथा🎙️ कृष्णाजी द्वारा भावपूर्ण वाचन एवं विवेचन🎧 Heartfelt narration and reflection by Krishnajiइस अध...",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, साई पादुका, mannat, manoti, sainawas, saimannat",
    "Views": "Unknown views",
    "Likes": "Unknown likes"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Why does Baba steal the chappels of a devotee? | Why does Sai Baba steal the chappals of a devote...",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GaEV3CCGbMA",
    "Transcript": "When life is going well then such mischief adorns the person. It is a fact. Om Sai Ram. Today we will discuss the Story of Hari knhoba described in the 49th chapter of Sai satcharitra. Hari knhoba, a resident of Mumbai, was very unfaithful and had fondness only for miracles. and with that purpose, he went shirdi in order to test Sai. However, baba knew his intentions very well and baba showed him Leela according to his feelings. when hari bhau, to take Baba's darshan went to dwarkamai, felt a desire to make obeisance at sai's feet. But for his new foot wear he could not find safe place to keep it. Finally, finding a place in corner he just shoved them in and took baba's darshan. on receiving udi prasad when he went to wear his foot-wear it was not in the place. On not getting chappals, hari bhau got agitated and restless. So plagued by the thoughts of it he went to SatheWada. with laden mind he took a bath and after pooja, naivedya he sat down for a meal. After eating when he came out to wash his hands, a boy appeared holding a stick at the end of which was the lost foot-wear crying aloud 'Hari ka beta jari ka Pheta' So hairbhau rushed forward and said to the boy, \" those are are my foot wear.\" So the boy said,\" He who is son of Hari has to show me his jari-turban only to him i will give these sandals. Then he showed all the marks indicated and convinced the boy, the boy gave the Sandals to Haribhau Hari bhau was amazed over how did baba knew that his father's name was knhoba i.e Hari krishnaji, what baba wants to teach us from this story of Hari Kanhoba. Please enlighten us. First of all, the character Hari Kanhoba is the one who has no faith towards saints. but carries fondness only for miracles done by the saints Desire to see miracles. So with this desire he reaches Shirdi to see whether truly such miracles happen or not Is it really true the what people say about him? With such unfaithful feelings he sets out to shirdi when he reaches, Baba too gives him the taste of what he desires. Its apparent if looked in a way that baba levels himself down to his . As he shod his feet in a brand new footwear along with a jari-embroidered turban on the head With quite an attachment to his new expensive footwear he tries to keep them safe and unnoticeable But still baba makes them disappear. And the story continues with baba sending a kid with the foot-wear, who cries aloud 'hari ka beta jari ka pheta' wandering and getting back hari bhau's foot-wear. Ultimately, he(hari bhau) being amazed becomes happy and convicts that miracles happen. But the story does not ends here. By all means when a person is in comfort and when there is no problem in his/her life. Then such thoughts like judging someone, to test the saints, to try them, to have fondness for miracles emerges the most. when everything in life is going well then such mischief adorns the person. It is a fact. we too are included in it. so baba reads that lack of problems in his life is a reason for such intentions, lets create some agitation in his life for some time. Baba takes away the shoes on which he had tremendous attachment As his mind grew restless and agitated then his whole focus was shifted from the habit of seeing others faults for sometime. even though he was entangled in his own troubles. but was saved from the wickedness of mind. Such instability is better than misdoing. so in our life too baba create such sport It we have become more 'tamo guni' than our limits then He will create problems in our life but he will deprive us from ,tammo gunn' It looks very small Leela but is very deep. otherwise one's wickedness would not wipe out. The attitude of taking life lightly would not leave. And as the story is related to shoes/footwear baba also wants to say that if you want to reach my 'darbar' then you will have to leave your shoes and come to me. Shoes represents here comfort why do we wear shoes? so that our feet would be protected from thorns and pebbles and we can walk comfortably. why do we leave slippers outside temples? Lord will be insulted if we go wearing shoes, this is one aspect but the deeper Side is that you have to leave your comforts if you want to reach Him. \"unless you are unable to leave your comforts you will never have darshan of My real eternal form\" The day when your comfort are left then the feeling of body as a self will decrease, and when it will decrease the awakening of soul will embark. They are co-related. Baba has tried to say a lot in this Leela from one foot-wear. In this world, four kinds of devotees revere Me arta, artharthi, jigyaasu and mumukshu Arth and Artharthi have selfish expectations. They revere Me because of their selfishness, helplessness and poverty But jigyasu and mumukshu are My true and selfless devotees In this world, selfish devotees always have an eye on Me but My sight always resides on selfless devotees . My Arth devotee spends his whole life in caring his footwear means he worships Me to secure daily needs of life, big or small comforts or to get relief from troubles. And my Artharthi devotee spends his whole life to protect or care for his turban i.e pride & honor meaning having name & fame in this world with such sentiment the one who is connected with Me. Reveres Me to care for one's pride and honor. But the one who can rise above these foot-wear and head turban is only My true devotee my true jigyasu or further beyond My true mumukshu. On this Leela My heart says that the one who is snared into one's wishes and selfish motives in My eyes he/she is a beggar. In opposite to this, the one who shuns own's wish and wears the diadem of My wish, is My true jigyasu and is My true mumukshu.",
    "Description": "📖 Shri Sai Satcharitra | Chapter 49\nDevotion or Pretense? — Haribhau's Slippers Leela\nThis is a story not just about a lost slipper, but about lost faith and true devotion.\n\nHaribhau—a respected man—comes to meet Sai Baba. But deep inside, he comes with a sense of testing and examining Baba. New slippers, a brocade turban, and doubts in his heart...\nBut Baba says nothing. He simply shows Haribhau the mirror of his own faith through a small leela.\n\n🪔 Was Haribhau's devotion genuine, or merely driven by miracles?\n🪔 Do we sometimes view Baba from the perspective of entertainment, logic, or miracles?\n🪔 Are the leelas of saints merely for viewing, or do they come to awaken something within us?\n\nIn this chapter, Baba didn't take anything away—he only removed attachment.\nHe showed that true faith resides not in appearances, but in inner humility and surrender.\n\nThis video raises a question—\nWhen something is lost in life, do we understand Baba's leela?\nOr do we also falter and, like Haribhau, fall into our own trials?\n\n🌸 Faith and patience—these are the two pillars of the Sai path.\nBaba says: \"I am here... but you must first come with true devotion.\"\n\nThis video is for all those who want to understand not just the leela, but the spiritual message hidden behind it.\n\n🙏 Come, watch, understand, and experience—\nIs your faith also ready to walk a new path today?\n\n#SaiBaba #ShriSainSachcharitra #SainLeela #ShraddhasBuri  \n#Haribhau #SpiritualJourney #SaiKiKripa #InnerDevotion  \n#SainBabaakiShiksha #SaiTruth #SaiPrem #SainKatha  \n#KrishnaJi #BabaKnowsAll #BhaktiPath\n\n\n📖 Shri Sai Satcharitra | Chapter 49\nShraddha or Show? —The Story of Hari Bhau's Slipper\nA deeply meaningful tale...\nA respected man visits Sai Baba — outwardly with reverence, but inwardly with a hidden desire to test the saint. Dressed in new slippers and a zari turban, he hopes to \"evaluate\" Baba's divinity. But Baba, through a quiet, effortless leela, holds up a mirror to his faith.\n\n▪ Was Hari Bhau’s faith real, or based only on outer miracles?\n▪ Do we too sometimes come to Baba with doubt, curiosity, or expectation rather than surrender?\n▪ Are divine leelas meant to impress the eyes — or awaken the heart?\n\nIn this chapter, Baba doesn't take away anything — He simply removes attachment and illusion through the mystery of a lost slipper.\n\n💭 Is Baba reminding us that true devotion is not in display, but in inner simplicity and surrender?\n\nThis video invites contemplation:\n🕊️ When something goes missing in life, can we see the leela behind the loss?\nOr do we, like Hari Bhau, begin to waver — only to find ourselves gently tested by Baba?\n\n🌼 Shraddha and Saburi — the two pillars of Sai's path.\nAnd Baba lovingly says: “I am here, but first, come with true feeling.”\n\nThis is not just a story.\nIt's a chance to rediscover your own faith — not the one you show, but the one you live.\n\n🙏 Watch, reflect, and feel deeply —\nCould your faith also find a new path, like Hari Bhau’s?\n\n\n#SaiBaba #SaiSatcharitra #SaiLeela #ShraddhaSaburi  \n#HariBhau #SpiritualJourney #FaithOverMiracles #SaiKripa  \n#InnerDevotion #SaiBabaTeachings #LostAndFound #DivineWisdom  \n#KrishnaJi #SaiStories #BabaKnowsAll #TrustSai …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, साई पादुका",
    "Views": "22,356 views",
    "Likes": "483"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Why women are not allowed to enter many other temples including chavadi of shirdi?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zhDSYqn2rBM",
    "Transcript": "To erase the darkness of mind, to remove the vices of mind, to eradicate the dissatisfaction of mind one who fights like a warrior with it every moment. Because, fight with mind is a internal war not external and if there is some war which adorns a human being in this world then this is it Om Sai Ram. Friends, today I have some different question in my mind. The question is about the chavadi in shirdi. Krishanaji, the question is that the chavadi in shirdi is divided into two sections and in one of the two sections women are allowed to enter but in the other where used to sleep every alternate night they are not allowed to enter still. So the question is that in this modern era we speak about equal rights and benefits to both men and women. and this is the place of sadguru where teachings of non discrimination is given but here we come to see the differences however peripherally. please give some clarity about this Question is about the allowance of women in chavadi's other section. Chavadi is the place where baba used to sleep every alternate night. And his sleeping technique was very unique He used to sleep on a bed of 60 to 65 dhotis spread out layers upon layers with his own hands. It is very unique normally no one does such. Those were the 64 yogic practices which Baba used to do during deep darkness. and he reached perfection traversing through those yogic practices. By Being enriched with those 64 kalas (Arts) he headed for perfection. To reach those yogic practices there must be some basic preparations Because if that basic preparations are not included in our sadhana then it is impossible to reach that stage so the question may arise that what are those basic preparations Firstly, the human who fights with his mind, struggles with himself by strengthening his intellect, by empowering his intellect is real 'purushartha' To erase the darkness of mind, to remove the vices of mind, to eradicate the dissatisfaction of mind one who fights like a warrior with it every moment. Because, to fight with mind is a internal war not external and if there is some war which adorns a human being in this world then this is it and as it is intrinsic it exists 24 hours, we can't take a break by fighting for a while. because mind is 24 hrs outrageous, it makes some or the other nuisance therefore has to reconcile again and again so the one who is engrossed in such war is only the 'purusha' if seen with spiritual perspective only a warrior who has battled in the early times of life, can reach till the leela of 64 yogic practices that baba used to perform , the one who has fought with the mind and has controlled it so here it is proven that the one who was engrossed in such 'purushartha' can enter that section of chavadi where yogic practices were followed by baba so a true man (purusha) is one who fight with the desires of his mind and fights with the vices of mind No woman needs to think that something wrong happened to them In reality a woman fighting with her internal wickedness of mind is actually purusha in my sight. and even with a man cloak if I am not in a struggle with my mind, though with a male body I am a woman within So its about inner purusha Today myraid of people take darshan of chavadi, no misunderstanding that we are purusha should be nourished one who is struggling with the chaotic conditions of his mind in reality is the real purusha The person who is executing purushartha is purusha yes, there were some compulsions of that time like in chavadi mostly men used to stay like fakirs, yogis and that's why may be women would not go to such places noticing it Also Panchayat used to sit in the chavadi to solve the daily problems of villagers and therefore due to these reasons women would not go there. But if we look with spiritual perspective then every one who goes is a woman yes, if any of them is doing 'purushartha' then he/she alone is a purusha om Sai Ram Due to social etiquettes and discipline it is not possible for women to be allowed to enter everywhere But yes, if we all can understand the correct definition of Purusha and Purushartha then for centuries the controversy about the entry of women in temples all over the world would come to an end forever. Ever since this world was created it has been a victim of gender discrimination If we look at it with physical aspect then this difference was, is and will remain But from spiritual point of view the Soul remain untouched by such differences. The one who keeps on flowing with the stream of world's Maya (illusion) and mind is woman And the one who dares to swim against this flow is a true man (purusha) At the end, on this topic Baba's heart says that only the one who has to improve intrinsically would understand my mysterious chavadi",
    "Description": "Why are women not allowed to enter many other temples including chavadi of shirdi? | Why are women not allowed in ancient temples of India and in the chavadi of Shirdi? | Why in few temples women's are not allowed | why are women's allowed in temple | Why are women not allowed in temples including the chavadi of Shirdi?\n\n#saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory #saibabadevotee #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, feminism, womendiscrimination, women restriction, women banned in temples, feminist",
    "Views": "22,823 views",
    "Likes": "377"
  },
  {
    "Title": "One who lives by the Sword die by the Sword | स्वयं साई द्वारा बताई गयी २ बकरीओ के पुनर्जन्म की कथा",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=blgzjtr8B7o",
    "Transcript": "If I have killed someone then in next birth I will have to pay for it. It is not possible to get rid of these. These are Baba's words. Om Sai Ram There is a story of reincarnation of goats in chapter 46 of Sai Satcharitra. One day baba on his way back from lendi baug met a flock of goats. from that flock Baba lovingly took two goats close to him and patted them and paying 32 rupees to the owner he purchased them . Madhavarao and tatya indignantly protested against baba's action But with modesty they asked Baba,\"why did you had such a deficit bargain ?\" you spend entire 32 Rupees on the goats of worth 2 rupees Baba unperturbed said,\"Go feed them a seer of pulse and then return them to the shepherd\". Hearing these both became more resented. Baba said ,\"O tatya, these goats that you see were brothers in their last birth\" of which the elder brother was very lazy while the younger one was industrious and skillful. As a result the younger collected lot of money. of which the elder brother became envious and decided to remove this thorn in the flesh. But the plotting came to light and both began to quarrel ultimately killing each other. and in this birth they are born as goats, I wanted to save them but their Karma stood in the way in your form Krishnaji, from this whole story what baba wants to teach us pls put some light on it. This story is based on previous birth moreover the message, the story wants to convey to us is very deep. As you sow so shall you reap , a proverb And in this granth probably in 36th chapter there is a vow Debt, enmity and murder, if a person comes in grip of them then it is not possible to get rid of them without suffering If I have taken a loan from someone then I will have to take several births to repay it. and if I have acquired enmity with someone then I will have to give returns for it in this birth or next. If I have killed someone then in next birth I will have to pay for it. It is not possible to get rid of these. These are Baba's words. so this story manifest this element. Here a brother has become enemy of another and is also a murderer. By getting greedy the elder brother wanted to kill the younger but in return the younger brother strikes the elder with axe is far more terrifying . Both becomes murderer of each other . Therefore, both are reincarnated as goats and why only as goats ? why not other species? They have taken goat form because they did not Value the human body , nor did they realize its dignity and its importance. And both killed each other and died. . Therefore in return both had to take birth of goats And even if Baba wants to save them. By giving 32 rupees i have purchased you both so that somehow I (baba) Can protect you where your (goats) worth was 4 rupees I have given 32 Rupees to save you, its my compassion because you were connected to me in last birth. so i wanted to save you any how but these 3 folonys debt, enmity and murder it never liberates anyone till the end of cycle unless it is repaid. Look even my Compassion too cannot reach till the state you have reached by doing wrong so there is no choice to return them to the shepherd who will sell them to a butcher who will mercilessly cut you like you have killed each other in your last birth. But still there is very subtle element in the story Baba say,\" They will have to die because of their heinous deeds but a i have purchased them by giving 32 rupees and then returned back so they have my right too. so I can see to it that while cutting from the hands of butcher the fear, distress, trembling state of your mind i will take care of that. so this deep is this Leela Whenever we have a feeling of animosity in one life or take loan from or in anger bring murderous attitude then always this Leela , this story from saisatcharitra feeling the essence of it if we can Save ourselves then this story which Baba has kept in front of us will be worthwhile So very profound teaching, You Cannot escape by Committing heinous crime like murder By taking several Birth you will have to pay the price. the person abandoning his ethics lives with muscle power and sword, dies with the same sword. well my (Baba's) mercy and compassion is limitless but these 3 crimes debt, enmity and murder are those crimes which limits my limitless compassion After committing these crime you reach to the point where even my compassion cannot reach. The Root cause of All the murders that have happened or are happening in this world and those murders that will happen in future is lust and power (money) In the end on this Leela my heart says, \" who has hunger for lust and power who will save him from being in shackles of murder.",
    "Description": "The story of reincarnation of two goats told by Sai himself - One who live with a sword die with a sword | २ बकरीओ  की पुनर्जन्म की कथा | The Story of Rebirth of Two Goats | स्वयं साई द्वारा बाताई गयी कहानी |\n\n\nश्री साईं सतचरित्र — अध्याय ४६\n\"दो बकरों की कथा: जब करुणा भी सीमित हो जाती है...\"\nइस अध्याय में वर्णित कथा दो सगे भाइयों के पूर्व जन्म की है, जो द्वेष, शत्रुता और हिंसा में इतना डूब जाते हैं कि उन्हें बकरों की योनि में जन्म लेना पड़ता है।\nबाबा की असीम करुणा के होते हुए भी, ऐसी कौन-सी सीमाएँ थीं जहाँ वह कुछ न कर सके?\n\n🌿 ४ रुपये मूल्य के बकरे बाबा ने ३२ रुपये में क्यों खरीदे?\n🌿 उनका यह कार्य केवल करुणा का भाव था या कोई गहन आध्यात्मिक संकेत?\n🌿 क्या मानव शरीर की गरिमा को हम वास्तव में समझते हैं?\n🌿 क्या हम भी कहीं ऐसी शत्रुता, क्रोध या लोभ में तो नहीं बंधे हैं जो हमें पतन की ओर ले जा रहे हों?\n\nइस प्रवचन में कृष्णाजी ने कामिनी-कांचन को आत्मा की प्रगति के सबसे बड़े बाधक बताते हुए, यह भी स्पष्ट किया कि:\n👉 ऋण, शत्रुता और हत्या जैसे महापापों का प्रायश्चित्त कल्पों तक संभव नहीं।\n👉 जो तलवार के बल पर जीता है, उसका अंत भी उसी से होता है।\n👉 और यह जीवन — यह मानव शरीर — मोक्ष का द्वार है, इसे व्यर्थ न जाने दें।\n\n💬 क्या आपने कभी किसी पुराने राग-द्वेष को छोड़कर शांति महसूस की है? नीचे कमेंट करके साझा करें।\n📌 यह कथा आपको कैसी लगी, और आपने इससे क्या सीखा? हम जानना चाहेंगे।\n\nश्री साईंनाथ महाराज की जय।\nॐ साईं राम 🙏✨\n\nShri Sai Satcharitra – Chapter 46\n“The Story of Two Goats: When Even Compassion Has Limits...”\nThis powerful chapter narrates the past life story of two real brothers, whose deep-rooted enmity and violence lead them to be reborn as goats.\nEven though Baba is the embodiment of boundless compassion, what were the circumstances in which even He could not intervene?\n\n🌿 Why did Baba pay 32 rupees for goats worth only 4 rupees?\n🌿 Was this act simply kindness, or did it hold a deeper spiritual message?\n🌿 Do we truly understand the sanctity of the human body?\n🌿 Are we too holding onto hatred, anger, or greed that could be pulling us away from our spiritual path?\n\nIn this discourse, Krishna Ji beautifully explains:\n👉 How “Kaamini and Kanchan” (lust and greed) are the greatest obstacles in spiritual growth.\n👉 That sins like debt, enmity, and murder are so grave they can’t be washed away even in the span of many lifetimes.\n👉 And that those who live by the sword ultimately fall by it.\n\nThis human life is a gateway to liberation — do not let it go to waste.\n\n💬 Have you ever experienced peace after letting go of old grudges? Share your experience in the comments.\n📌 What did this story teach you? We'd love to hear your thoughts.\n\nShri Sainath Maharaj Ki Jai.\nOm Sai Ram 🙏✨ …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य",
    "Views": "8,997 views",
    "Likes": "306"
  },
  {
    "Title": "२ चिपकलीओ ने बताया सत चित आनंद का रहस्य | 2 Lizards signifies the meaning of Sat, Chit and Aananda",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nqk6j7_UMeY",
    "Transcript": "The lizard in dwarkamai, which is elder, is close to Baba is in the company of Baba, is under his radiance Therefore she is elder sister. she is our intellect. om Sai Ram 15th chapter of saicharitra consist a story of two lizards one day Baba along with his devotees was sitting in Dwarkamai and a lizard on the wall began to chirrup. A devotee asked,\" Baba, why is this lizard chirruping? Is it a bad omen?\" Baba replied the lizard is joyous in anticipation of her sister's arrival from Aurangabad to meet her. On hearing this the devotee got-into lot of thoughts thinking what a strange answer from Baba. Lizard and her sister ! ! After sometime a gentleman arrived from aurangabad on horseback. He emptied his bag and dusted it, from the bag a lizard came out and hastily ran towards the lizard in Dwarkamai. Then baba told the devotee to keep an eye on the lizard As soon as both the lizards meet each other they kissed, went around each other as if celebrating the festival of joy. Krishnaji, the question is are lizards too omniscient and do they behold relations and in which joy they are getting so drenched in. Pls put some light on this. If we look closely chapter 15 is very deep After 11th chapter, chapter 15th is the most talked about in which there is this story of two lizards First of all the devotee sitting in dwarkamai asks whether the Chirruping of lizard is good or bad omen Baba does not consider it beneficial to answer it what auspicious or inauspicious and In life whatever happens with us is will of God some body's doings do not affect our life. This is our ignorance. Therefore baba does not prioritize to give answer to that question. In his view the question is so worthless that he did not want to give importance to it by answering it. And secondly whether the lizard is also omniscient like baba Yogis, sadgurus, different scriptures all have made one thing clear that human form among 84 lakh species, is the greatest. if a human makes a good use of his life, achieve the parampurusharth of life can attain perfection. only a human not meant for any other animal. That to if he could walk on the path according to scriptures and act according to sadguru's words , then Journey till purnbramha is possible. It is not possible for any other animal or species. there are two lizards,we have to understand this well, one is in baba's Darbar which baba says she is elder sister and other is from Aurangabad means she is from outside. Lizard in Dwarkamai is elder to the one from Aurangabad The mystery behind this Leela is hidden in the description of this two lizards. Lizard in Dwarkamail is close to baba, is in company of Baba, is under his radiance. Therefore is elder one. she represents our intellect which is full of eternal wisdom.(nityanitya vivek) And the lizard that is wandering outside, coming from aurangabad, means it is snared in the outside world. It is mind. It is described in our scriptures that worlds greatest purushartha is battle of mind with intellect battle of wisdom with mind, no purushartha is greater than this. so this story tells about this while living in baba's company first fill Your intellect with light and then with it work on mind which wanders However mind is accustomed to wander , not very easy to handle with intellect But therefore it is called Param Purushartha The Day when the intellect by taking blessings from baba acquires the power to control the wanderer mind, that Day we Have reached the culmination of Parampurushartha As if we have found our destination when the wandering mind Comes in complete control of intellect it will result in bliss which is described between the two lizards on their meeting, that bliss is its pinnacle. i.e when mind is contained in the intellect then the resultant is bliss and bliss. That is why satchitanand word has so importance. There are 3 words in satchitanand. Sat , chit and anand. Lizard in Dwarkamai is intelligence, representing 'Sat' and wandering lizard is mind, representing 'Chit' when this 'sat' and 'chit' meet then only bliss is experienced whole Leela manifests these and gives us advice that life's parampurusharth is to fill our intellect with wisdom Develop your conscience about good and evil and with the help of this wisdom fight with your mind and take control of it . when 'chit' meets with 'sat' then is 'satchitanand' This is the depth of the Leela .",
    "Description": "इस एपिसोड मैं हुमने २ चिपकलीय के कहानी के माध्यम से लीला मैं छुपे हुए अधायात्मिक रहस्य को उजागर किया है । उमीद है आपके ह्रिदयोको छु लेगीं\n\n\n#saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja \n#saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba #dashera #saibabapunyatithi #saibabavijaydashmi #saibabasamadhi #saigyan #saibabaprayer #saibabapreachings #saibabadialogue #saibabadivineteachings #दशहरा #साईबाबा #साईलीला #साईबाबासमाधी …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य",
    "Views": "20,408 views",
    "Likes": "508"
  },
  {
    "Title": "What Sai has to Say about his own miracles | साई के चमत्कारो पर स्वयं साई क्या कहते है ! |",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6pvHedcICkw",
    "Transcript": "The world is captivated by the grace in My glance, by My divine Leelas, and by My miracles. But what truly captivates Me - is a soul devoted to foundational virtues, to compassion, and to unwavering faith. If I have lit a flame from water do not mistake that for My miracle. But yes - if I have turned an atheist into a believer, know that to be My true miracle. If I have lifted you out of illness or adversity, let that not be counted as My miracle. But if you can endure every hardship with a smile, then that is indeed My true miracle. If I have blessed a barren home with a child, do not call that My miracle. But if, after losing your only child, you remain anchored in peace that is My true miracle. If, through My grace, your home is filled with riches, do not consider that My miracle. But if, even clothed in rags, your face shines with joy that is My true miracle. If I have granted life to someone on the verge of death, do not name that as My miracle. But if someone, while still alive, has died to the world for the sake of others know that to be My truest miracle. And in the end, this is what My heart yearns to say Any Leela that does not raise a soul to the heights of devotion, wisdom, and dispassion, is not a true Leela That miracle is not a miracle",
    "Description": "🌻Om Sai Ram🌻\nIn this soul-stirring reflection, the essence of true divinity is revealed—not through outward miracles, but through inner transformation. While the world marvels at supernatural acts, Sai speaks of a deeper truth: the real miracle lies not in lighting a lamp with water, but in lighting the flame of faith within a wavering heart.\nTrue Leelas, He reminds us, are those that uplift the soul—awakening devotion, wisdom, and detachment. Smiling through pain, rising above loss, and living selflessly for others—these are the miracles that move the Divine.\nThis powerful message redefines what it means to be blessed—not by what we receive, but by what we become.\n🌿 Experience the miracle that transforms the soul.\n\n🌻ॐ साई राम🌻\nइस आत्मा को छू लेने वाले संदेश में, सच्चे चमत्कार का रहस्य उजागर होता है — बाहरी घटनाओं में नहीं, बल्कि आंतरिक रूपांतरण में। जब संसार अलौकिक लीलाओं पर मोहित होता है, साईं एक गहन सत्य प्रकट करते हैं: चमत्कार वह नहीं जो जल से दीप जलाए, बल्कि वह है जो संदेह से भरे हृदय में आस्था की लौ जला दे।\nसच्ची लीला वही है जो आत्मा को ऊँचाइयों तक ले जाए — भक्ति, ज्ञान और वैराग्य की ओर। पीड़ा में मुस्कुराना, हानि में स्थिर रहना, और दूसरों के लिए स्वयं को अर्पित कर देना — यही वे चमत्कार हैं जो प्रभु के हृदय को स्पर्श करते हैं।\nयह संदेश हमें याद दिलाता है कि ईश्वर की कृपा हमारे पास क्या आता है, इससे नहीं मापी जाती — बल्कि हम उसके कारण क्या बन जाते हैं, उससे प्रकट होती है।\n🌿 अनुभव कीजिए उस चमत्कार को, जो आत्मा का रूपांतरण करता है।\n\n#sai  #saileela #saileelas #saibaba #shirdi #saileelatv #saibabastory  #saibabadevotee  #saibabadevotionalsongs #saileelarahasyam #saisatcharitrastories #saisatcharithra #saileelarahasya #saisatcharitaleelarahasya #saibabateachings #saibabablessings #sai #saiaashirwad #saipooja #saisandesh #saiteahings #shirdi #saibaba #sai #saibabasansthan #saibabadarshan #saibabatemple #shirdisaibaba …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य, saichamatkar, साईबाबा के चमत्कार, साई चमत्कार, साईबाबा की महिमा, साईबाबा की लिलायें, saibaba's mircales, stories of mircales of Saibaba, miraculous saibaba",
    "Views": "21,567 views",
    "Likes": "444"
  },
  {
    "Title": "Why Sai stood naked on the day of dusshera and said to the devotees” look for am I Hindu or Muslim?",
    "URL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sadZ8tR7vco&pp=0gcJCSMKAYcqIYzv",
    "Transcript": "If circumcised then baba is muslim and if not then he is hindu but in both cases he is becoming one sided Om sai ram chapter 42 of shri saisatcharitra marks about baba's mahasamadhi as you all know baba took mahasamadhi on the day of vijayadashmi in1918 2 years prior this,i.e in 1916on the same day during simoulanghan baba showed indescribable leela to the devotees clouds began to thunder and lightning began to twinge As if baba attained the form of jamadagni(anger incarnate) and he put his langot and kafni in dhuni After that flames began to flare and the rageous naked saint began to ask his devotees , look for whether I am a Hindu or Muslim so krishnaji question is that the baba who always conveyed a message sabKa Malik EK that baba asks such a contradictory question to the devotees Don't you feel baba is being one sided, either of Hindus or Muslims. What really does he wants to say through this leela please Guide us This Leela of chapter 42 is very sensitive It is sensitive because while reading the chapter it feels pheripharally that one who saw all religions equally throughout his life even lived in accordance At the end it seems like he is getting one sided standing naked he says , \"look for whether I am hindu or Muslim whole life you have troubled me for this\" Baba wants to say to see if am Circumcised or not if we see the Leela on the basis of circumcision , that if Circumcised then Baba is Muslim and if not then he is hindu But in both the cases it is becoming onside It clashes with his life long teachings of his If we look at this Leela pheipharally and if baba doesn't give the depth of it then really lots of questions will arise like the one you asked Before coming to this Leela I would like to take a shloka from Bhagavad gita by which it would get clear that what exactly baba wanted to say behind this Leela The shloka is Just as man casts off his worn out clothes and puts on new ones, so also the self is being embodied when the body worns out it is handed over the fire and self remains Here baba had to say this i have incinerated my upper encapsulation,body,form,color,name the one standing in front of you all is self (the Ataman) Bramhan now just look for whether it it hindu or muslim so he wanted to say that nither i am hindu nor muslim i am the enlighten, the light form parabramha neither i am hindu nor muslim nor i have any caste nor any creed i am shudh budh parabramha i am the eternal light.now tell this light is hindu or muslim standing naked meand i am jyoti swaroop parabramha .Now tell am i hindu or muslim . He wanted to say if looked superficially it will create dellusion but if reached its indepth meaning therefore we have taken the help of this bhagvad gita shloka where lord krishna wants to say the same this body is cased over the self by us as a clothes this form,name,color,identity,nature all this upper filth is like a cloth and if i sum up all this and handover to fire the remaining , naked figure of baba is eternal light it is parabramha of light nor it has any caste, creed or race in this way if this leela is recived then only it will clear in our mind or else it is mere illusion so is more sensetive. yes, is sensetive, definetly. i think this can be the only clarification to this leela beautiful!! krishnaji like the earth, the sun and the sky do not belong to any religion same way saibaba if belongs to any then of all religions and if not then of none the essence of this leela through this leela it is as if baba is telling us that hey man, every human being is covered with two types of coverings or set as two types of ignorance 1)veyasthigat agyan 2) samastigat agyan according to the scriptures till the neck of the man is guarded by veyasthigat agyan whereas the head of the man guarded by samastigat agyan in this leela my langot and kafni are an indicative of humans veyasthigat agyan and my head cloth is an indicative of humans samashtigat agyan and unless i turn these coverings into ashes i can not enreach you till purnbramh or parabramh state i won't be able to give you the experience that you are the ultimate light and through this leela baba wants to say that my name, my form, my modalites and my religion are mere masks or say it as my attier but in reality i am that illuminance on whose strength this creations operates undoubtedly i am attire less",
    "Description": "Sai baba is hindu or musalman | Is Sai Baba Hindu or Muslim? | Was Sai Baba a Hindu or a Muslim? Why Sai stood naked on the day of Dusshera and said to the devotees,” look for, am I Hindu or Muslim? (with English Subtitles)\n\nThe body becomes only light after renunciation\nThis is the eternal form of my Sai\nThis body is only the garment of the soul\nAs soon as it becomes worn out, it becomes worthy of renunciation\nThere is no religion of earth, sun and sky\nSimilarly, my Baba belongs to every religion\n\nChapter 42 - What is Baba's religion? (His Maha Samadhi)\n\nIn this video, Anna Ji tells how Baba introduced us to his eternal form of light.\n\nHe also explains that the sun, earth and sky have no religion.\n\nKnow why it is necessary to renounce the physical body for the eternal form.\n\nWhat is the relation between soul and body according to Shrimad Bhagavad Gita, and how renunciation of this physical cover is necessary for the spiritual advancement of a living being.\n\n#SaiBaba #Spirituality #Maha_Samadhi #Eternal_Form #BhagavadGita #Religion #Soul #Body #Spirituality #saibabadvice \n\nChapter 42 – What is Baba’s Dharma? (His Maha Samadhi)\n\nIn this video, Anna Ji explains how Baba revealed his eternal luminous form.\nUnderstand why the sun, earth, and sky have no specific religion.\nLearn why the renunciation of the physical body is essential for the eternal self.\nDiscover what the relationship between the soul and body is according to the Bhagavad Gita, and why shedding this physical covering is crucial for the spiritual progress of a living being.\n\n#SaiBaba #Spirituality #MahaSamadhi #EternalForm #BhagavadGita #Dharma #Soul #Body #Faith #krishnaji \n\n\nREFERENCE:\nSHREE SAI SATCHARITRA ADHYAY 42 …...more\n...more\nShow less",
    "Tags": "sai baba is muslim or hindu, sai baba is hindu or muslim, best youtube channel on saibaba, saileela, sai leela, sai leela rahasya, saileela rahasya, saikediwani, sai ke diwane, saileela tv, saibaba devotee speaks, saihridgat, साईबाबा, साईलीला, साईबाबासमाधी, साईलीला रहस्य",
    "Views": "89,731 views",
    "Likes": "855"
  }
]